

 

 

 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The United Kennel Club would like to thank Karen A. Shivers for her continued dedication to the sport of dogs 
and the promotion of Nosework. It is her contribution and determination to make Nosework available for every 
UKC® dog and handler that has made UKC Nosework grow. 

 

Table of Contents 

Rules for Nosework Competition .............................................................................................................. 2 

Chapter 1 – General Rules ....................................................................................................................... 4 

Chapter 2 – Performance, Handling & Equipment .................................................................................... 10 

Chapter 3 – Search / Area Size and Element Requirements .................................................................... 16 

Chapter 4 – Judging Procedures .............................................................................................................. 19 

Chapter 5 – UKC Nosework and Summary of Titles ................................................................................. 23 

Chapter 6 – Novice Element Classes and Requirements .......................................................................... 26 

Chapter 7 – Advanced Element Classes and Requirements ..................................................................... 28 

Chapter 8 – Superior Individual Classes and Requirements ..................................................................... 30 

Chapter 9 – Master Element Classes and Requirements .......................................................................... 32 

Chapter 10 – Elite Element Classes and Requirements............................................................................ 34 

Chapter 11 – Handler Discrimination Classes, Titles & Requirements ...................................................... 36 

Chapter 12 – Nosework Event Rules and Stewarding Responsibilities ..................................................... 42 

Chapter 13 – Placements, Awards, and Ribbons ...................................................................................... 44 

Chapter 14 – Hall of Fame Awards ........................................................................................................... 46 

Chapter 15 – Definitions .......................................................................................................................... 48 

Inherent Rights & Powers of UKC ............................................................................................................. 51 

UKC Policy Regarding Persons Associated with Fighting Dogs ................................................................ 51 

October 20, 2021 Rule Change Insert ...................................................................................................... 52 

 

UKC is the trademark of the United Kennel Club located in Kalamazoo, Michigan. The use of the initials UKC in 
association with any other registry would be in violation of the registered trademark. Notify the United Kennel 
Club, 100 E Kilgore Rd, Kalamazoo MI 49002-5584, should you become aware of such a violation. 

 

Rules for Nosework Competition 

Nosework is an uninterrupted performance by the dog and handler without direction from the judge. The 
arrangement of the searches that are found in Nosework are randomly chosen and are like single purpose K-9 
detection dogs whose duties include searching for drugs and explosives, locating missing people and finding 
crime scene evidence. The Nosework team is evaluated on their ability to search for, locate, and respond to, 
target odors defined by the UKC Nosework Rulebook. 

 

The overall performance should convey an image of fun, enthusiasm and the ability of the team to work in 
partnership. Nosework is meant for all breeds and types of dogs. It enables them to use their natural olfactory 
abilities to work in partnership with their handler and to respond to specific target odors modeled after working 
detection dogs. This activity provides a safe and enriching environment, can be easily performed in a wide variety 
of locations, and builds a trusting and lasting relationship between handler and dog. 

 

The concept of Nosework is meant for all dogs and handlers no matter their physical abilities and structure. All 
dogs under reasonable control as determined by the judge should be able to participate in Nosework events. 
Nosework allows unlimited communication between dog and handler. The Judge should only be concerned with 
the overall execution and completion of each exercise. 

 

Exhibitor Guidelines. It is the responsibility of all exhibitors to do whatever they can to assist the host club and 
promote the family atmosphere of UKC events and good sportsmanship. Exhibitors’ clothing should be neat and 
clean. Their apparel speaks to the respect they have for the sport, the event and its proceedings. Exhibitors’ 
dogs should be clean and, where necessary, brushed or trimmed to present a neat appearance. Experienced 
exhibitors should try to help new exhibitors. Beginners are critical to the future of the sport. All exhibitors must 
display good sportsmanship and respect for others. Exhibitors should take care when discussing a 
score/placement with the judge and accept the decision of the judge gracefully. Remember, it was the judge’s 


evaluation of THAT performance on THAT day. Exhibitors should always keep their area clean, dispose of all 
dog waste appropriately, and leave an event site in the condition they found it. Every exhibitor must know the 
rules before competing and abide by them. 

Exhibitors are NOT allowed in the search areas of the trial until after they have run their search. If any exhibitor 
is found to be in the working search areas prior to their run, they will be excused from the event and ineligible to 
run any dogs for that day. 

 

Exhibitors may choose one (1) person to accompany them into the search area during the running of their dogs 
to video and/or photograph their performance. These people must remain in a designated area during the entire 
performance, with minimal movement (only movement required to video or photograph the run). Any interference 
or negative effect that results in a non-qualifying performance due to the additional people brought in by the 
handler will not be allowed a re-run. To protect the integrity of the hides all photos and videos are to be kept 
private until the completion of the trial, and all placements have been awarded for that trial. Exhibitors and 
spectators who have observed any searches are prohibited from discussing any detail in relation to or the 
operation of the trial with any other exhibitor or spectator, other than to say they passed or failed. Exhibitors 
and/or spectators must not discuss any details verbally or electronically, including through social media, texting, 
or video of any nosework run. Doing so could result in their dog’s performance being invalidated. In such cases, 
no refunds will be granted for any searches not completed. A club may designate a official 
photographer/videographer for use in the search area. If the club designates an official photographer 
/videographer, they may restrict all other people from taking photos or videos while in the search area. If no 
designated photographer/videographer is present, the exhibitor is only allowed one (1) person to take photos or 
videos while in the search area. 

 

The club may provide an area for exhibitors who are entered in the trial that is located away from the working 
area. Handlers may carry their dog’s reinforcer or reward with them during the search. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 1 

GENERAL RULES 

 

Section 1. Jurisdiction. The following rules and regulations governing UKC licensed Nosework events and 
the awarding of UKC Championship points, passing searches and titles issued by the United Kennel Club are 
uniform and are not given on a local or geographical basis. All UKC licensed Nosework events shall be 
governed by the Official UKC Rules for All-Breed Events and Misconduct and Discipline Guidelines, and the 
Official UKC Nosework Rulebook. 

 

Section 2. Eligibility of dogs. To be eligible to compete in licensed Nosework classes dogs must be at least 
six months of age and permanently registered with UKC, have a valid Temporary Listing (TL) number or 
Performance Listing (PL) number as of the day of the event. At a pre-entry only event, the dog must be 
permanently registered or have a valid TL or PL number by the pre-entry deadline date of the event. Dogs with 
disqualifying conformation faults may compete in licensed Nosework classes. 

 

Lame dogs, dogs that appear ill, females in season, and pregnant or lactating females may not compete in a 
Nosework trial. No dog that has sutures, bandages, adhesive or any other material that is indicative of, or related 
to, any surgical or medical procedure may compete in a Nosework trial. Should any dog compete in a Nosework 
trial while in any condition listed above, the judges shall excuse the dog from competition and mark the reason 
in the judge’s book and they need not accept or seek the opinion of a veterinarian. 

 

Females in season: The host club has the option of refunding the entire entry fee or retaining 50% of the fee 
as a processing fee for any Nosework competitor who provides a veterinarian’s certificate verifying that the 
female came into season after the pre-entry deadline date for entries. The certificate may be mailed, provided 
the post-mark is no later than the date prior to the day of the trial, or delivered by hand to the Event Secretary 
before the published start time of the trial. 

 

Females that are so distracting to males to cause a disturbing element must be excused by a judge, and the 
reason marked in the judge’s book. The judge’s decision is final, and they need not seek the opinion of a 
veterinarian. 

 

Dogs with disabilities: Deaf dogs, blind dogs, and dogs that have lost use of or are missing all or part of one 
or more limbs may participate in Nosework trials but must be able to perform all required searches. Provisions 
may be made for dogs with rear support wheelchairs/K9 carts, such as running last, etc. A judge may excuse a 
dog missing a limb for lameness only if the judge determines that the dog is stiff or sore in one or more of its 
remaining limbs. Dogs who are showing signs of stress due to their disability such as apprehension, fear, or 
reluctance to work should be excused from competition. The judge’s decision is final, and they need not accept 
or seek the opinion of a veterinarian. 

 

Section 3. Eligibility of Owners/Handlers. Nosework handlers may be any age provided the handler is able to 
control the dog. A judge may excuse a dog at any time if they believe the handler is unable to control the dog. 
The judge’s decision is final. Handlers under the age of 18 may compete as a Junior Handler to be eligible for 
the Total Junior award (when offered). A Junior Handler may not have reached their eighteenth birthday as of 
January 1st of the competition year. After December 31st of the year in which the junior turns 18 years of age, 
they may no longer participate as a junior. A club may request verification of the Junior Handler’s age. Junior 
Handlers are responsible for notifying the Event Secretary/Manager of their participation upon checking in at the 
event. Handlers under 18 years of age do not have to be a member of the UKC Junior program to compete but 
will not be eligible for awards or acknowledgements that UKC Junior members are eligible for. 

 

Exhibitors with more than one dog entered in a trial. Exhibitors may only handle one dog in each class. An 
exhibitor may enter more than one dog in the same class if a separate handler is provided for each dog. Exhibitors 
may enter and handle more than one dog in a trial provided the additional dog(s) are entered in a different class 
or from all other entries being handled by that exhibitor. Dogs that are not owned by the exhibitor or a member 
of the exhibitor’s immediate family must be entered in the “B” classes. 


Handlers with Disabilities. Only one person may handle a dog in the search areas. Handlers may use a 
wheelchair, crutches, cane or any other means of mechanical assistance in this area. The judge may also make 
reasonable modifications to the extent that it assists the handler. No modification may be made that gives any 
advantage to the handler’s dog or that changes the dog’s part of the required search/performance in any way. 

 

Section 4. Eligibility of Dogs Owned by Judges and Immediate Family/Household of Judges. Judges may 
have a dog they own or co-own exhibited by a family member or someone else in any event, but not in any 
element they are judging in a trial they are officiating. The back-up judge system for performance events must 
be in place for an assigned judge’s dog that they own or co-own or for any immediate family/household member 
to be exhibited in the event in which they are officiating. 

 

Section 5. Back-Up Certifying Judge System. Nosework judges’ dogs and/or immediate family/household 
members may compete in the same trial that the judge is assigned to under the following provisions: 

The judge must notify the club in advance that they wish to enter a dog in an event they are assigned to officiate. 

a. The host club must designate a certifying judge and a back-up certifying judge on the event 
application. 
b. Dog(s) owned by the certifying judge and/or immediate family/household member may compete only 
under the assigned back-up certifying judge. The back-up certifying judge may only officiate for the 
regular certifying judge (and/or immediate family/household members of the certifying judge) and 
may not officiate for any other exhibitors entered in that event. 
c. Officials are prohibited from interrupting their assignment to exhibit. 
d. Officials competing in the events in which they are officiating will not be eligible for placements or 
awards. 
e. Assigned back-up certifying judges will be eligible for any awards, placements, All-Star and 
Championship points. 




 

Section 6. Emergency Replacement of Back-Up Certifying Judge. Should an assigned back-up certifying 
judge fail to appear at an event in which they were assigned as the designated back-up certifying judge, there 
will be no emergency replacement of the back-up certifying judge’s assignment if there is no other fully licensed 
certifying judge at the event. In this case, the certifying judge will forfeit their entry and fulfill their assignment. If 
an event was published in the UKC Upcoming Events on the UKC website (ukcdogs.com) as having a back-up 
certifying judge, and if a fully licensed certifying judge attends an event where the assigned back-up certifying 
judge did not appear, the certifying judge in attendance may serve as the back-up certifying judge. Clubs must 
note the change in back-up certifying judges and provide a detailed explanation of the circumstances in their 
event report. Clubs who assign or allow a back-up judge to officiate at a trial where one has not been published 
on the UKC website could result in disciplinary action as outlined under the Official UKC Rules for All-Breed 
Events and Misconduct and Discipline Guidelines. 

 

Section 7. Entering a UKC Nosework Event. Entries to all events for licensed classes must be submitted using 
the most current official UKC entry form. Entry forms must be complete when submitted to the Event Secretary, 
including a valid UKC Permanent Registration number, UKC Performance Listing (PL) number or UKC 
Temporary Listing (TL) number. Incomplete or unsigned entry forms, or entries unaccompanied by entry fees, 
are invalid and are not to be accepted by the Event Secretary. In the Master and Elite classes, it is the 
responsibility of the handler to ensure that the dog’s “alert” behavior(s) is listed and clearly defined on the entry 
form for each trial. 

 

All Nosework classes (Novice-Elite), and elements do not have to be offered at every licensed Nosework trial. 
UKC Nosework titles may only be earned in licensed trials. Elements may be officiated in any order as 
determined by the host club. 

 

Section 8. Judge’s Limits. Clubs should make every effort to ensure that a judge’s assignment does not exceed 
eight hours per day based on the number of entries per judge, per day. 

 

If entries for a Nosework trial exceed the eight-hour time limit for an judge prior to the pre-entry deadline date, 
the club must: 


• Contact UKC and request approval to exceed the eight-hour judging time limit, or, 
• Hire an overflow judge following the overflow judge procedures. 


 

Section 9. Entry Limits. Clubs that have set an entry limit for less than the maximum eight-hour time limit per 
judge may not accept any additional entries over their published limit unless the club has established a wait list. 
Procedures and rules regarding wait list are provided in this rulebook. 

 

Clubs that have not set entry limits must use the eight-hour time limit per judge per day to determine how many 
entries they can accept without exceeding an eight-hour judging time. Clubs must allow an appropriate set-up 
time within the eight-hour daily limit per judge. 

 

Nosework classes are assigned a certain number of minutes per class to help estimate judging time. When 
accepting entries, the trial secretary must not assign more entries to any judge than is permitted by the eight-
hour limit. If an unexpected error occurs, such as the trial running behind or a mistake in calculation, judges 
should not stop their assignment. They should finish their assignment and make a note on their final judge’s 
books. 

 

Nosework Working Calculator: This will estimate the average amount of time assigned to each judge and allow 
trial secretaries to determine when limits have been reached. The calculator is available for download at the UKC 
website. 

 



UKC Nosework Classes 

8 hr (480 min) per day/per judge (element and level 
dependent) 



Novice Elements 

1 – 2.5 minutes per entry 



Advanced Elements 

1 – 3 minutes per entry 



Superior Elements 

2 – 3 minutes per entry 



Master Elements 

2 – 4 minutes per entry 



Elite Elements 

2.5 – 4.5 minutes per entry 



HD Novice, Advanced and Excellent 

1 minute per entry 



HD Master 

2 minutes per entry 



 

 

Section 10. Overflow Judge. A club must hire an overflow judge if the 8-hour time limit for a judge is exceeded 
by at least 2 hours before the pre-entry deadline date. The overflow judge must be requested and approved by 
the UKC in writing, prior to the event. The club must provide an approved judge for the overflow assignment and 
submit that judge’s name with the request. The club will assign the duties of the overflow judge for that trial. 

 

If a Back-Up Certifying Judge was approved for the trial, they may also act as an over-flow judge if qualified. The 
overflow judge may also act as the backup judge if qualified, but may not officiate for any class they may be 
entered in. 

 

Section 11. Wait Lists and Entry Acceptance Options. UKC Clubs holding a license for Nosework events 
may use the following methods for accepting pre-entries. 

 

a. Traditional. As the entries are received, they are numbered and assigned spots in the trial until the trial 
has met the posted entry limits or the amount of entries for the trial has reached the eight-hour time limit 
allowed per judge. It is recommended that trial secretaries open envelopes, and/or record the date and 
time that electronic entries are received to ensure all the entries are valid. Invalid entries shall be returned 
to the sender as soon as possible. 


 

b. Wait List. Clubs that establish an entry limit may accept entries over the limit provided they establish a 
“wait list” of all entries that are received over the limit and kept in the order they are received. The first 
person listed on the waitlist will be given the first opportunity to be entered in the trial in the event of a 
cancellation of a pre-entered dog. On the day of the trial, if any of the pre-entered dogs are absent, the 



absentees will be replaced by the first person on the wait list that is present and ready to compete. Clubs 
must refund the entry fees for all the exhibitors on the wait list who do not get the opportunity to compete. 


 

c. Random Draw. Clubs using the Random Draw acceptance method must provide an entry opening date 
as well as all the additional required dates, times and location information when applying for their event 
license. Random Draw entries are all treated equally without regard to date/time received. 


 

1. Draw Period. Clubs determine a “Draw Period” during which time entries are accepted for the 
Random Draw. The start time and date of the Draw Period will be the same as the Opening Date for 
the pre-entries to be accepted. The Draw Period must be at least seven (7) days in length (14 days 
recommended) and must have a defined closing date and time. 


 

2. Entries. All entries received during the Draw Period shall be accepted for the Random Draw and will 
be treated equally without regard to the date received or any other criteria. UKC recommends that 
trial secretaries open envelopes and/or record the date and time that electronic entries as they are 
received to ensure all the entries are valid. Invalid entries shall be returned to the sender as soon as 
possible. 


 

3. Conducting the Random Draw. If the entry limit(s) is exceeded during the “Draw Period” the club 
shall conduct a Random Draw of all entries received. Otherwise, the Random Draw is not necessary. 
The Random Draw shall be held within 48 hours of the closing date and time of the “Draw Period.” 
The date, hour, and location of the random draw must be stated on the UKC Upcoming Events Listing. 
The drawing is to be held in a place accessible to the public. The results of the draw will be made 
available to the people present. One drawing shall be held for consecutive trials. If one trial fills before 
the others, the draw will continue for the remaining entries in each corresponding trial. If the last 
envelope, or electronic entry selected in the Random Draw contains entries that would exceed the 
total entry limit, there shall be a manual or computerized random draw of the individual entries 
contained in the envelope or electronic entry. When the advertised entry limit has been reached, all 
remaining entries shall be drawn to establish the order of the wait list. If openings in the trial become 
available prior to the closing date, the opening shall be filled in order by entries on the Wait List. 


 

4. Who Draws. One secretary or one group of cooperating secretaries shall conduct the draw. In 
conducting the drawing for entries, it is the responsibility of the Trial Secretary to avoid any method 
that raises questions as to its randomness and impartiality. 


The drawing may be: 

• Manual: Trial Secretary selects envelopes or electronic entries (or numbers assigned to each 
envelope) at random and entries contained within each envelope shall gain entry to trial up to 
the stated entry limits. 
• Computerized: The computerized method must be impartial, must select all entries submitted 
in one envelope or electronic entry as one group, and must conform to the standards of 
random selection. 


 

d. Secured Entries for Trial Workers. Clubs offering the “Random Draw” acceptance method may also elect 
to offer “Secured Entries” for Trial workers. 
1. The club may secure entry spots for “Trial Workers” who have agreed to work at the trial. Entry spots 
filled by “Trial Workers” are part of the “Total Entry Limit” stated in the premium list. Although there is 
no limit on the number of dogs a designated “Trial Worker” may run, it is recommended that clubs 
select workers who will handle no more than two (2) dogs. 
2. Clubs using the secured entry system must provide all the required dates, times and additional 
information when applying for their event license. No Secured Entry may be transferred. The 
maximum number of “workers” who may receive secured entry spots are as follows: 
• 25 “workers” for Trial 1 
• 25 “workers” for Trial 2 


 


Section 12. Temporary Listing (TL) Numbers. TL numbers are only valid at conformation, performance, and 
Pointing Dog events. TL numbers may be purchased through the UKC website twenty-four hours a day, seven 
days a week. You may also purchase a TL number by contacting UKC Show Operations within normal business 
hours. All Temporary Listing Numbers are non-refundable, non-transferable, and do not apply to the cost of 
permanent registration or Performance Listing (PL) numbers. 

 

Section 13. Class Restrictions. 

• No dog may be entered more than once in the same Nosework class at the same trial. 
• No dog may be entered in more than one section (“A” or “B”) of the same class. 
• No dog may be entered in the “A” section of any two Nosework classes in the same element at the same 
trial. (example Novice A Container and Advance A Container) 
• No dog may be entered in the "B" section of an Advanced or higher class and be entered in the "A" 
section of a lower level class within an element at the same trial. (example: Superior B Interior and 
Advance A Interior) 
• Once a dog has obtained any element title, the dog may continue to compete in that element provided 
the dog is entered and competes in the “B” section of the Nosework class. 
• Nosework judges, professional and/or amateur Nosework instructors are only eligible to enter in the B 
section of all Nosework classes. 
• No Nosework class may be entered for exhibition only. 


 

Section 14. Class Changes. Any dog that has, according to the owner’s records, completed the requirements 
for a UKC title may be shown at the next level of competition at the first event following the completion of the 
title. Where two events are held concurrently, a dog completing the requirements for a title at Show/Trial 2 cannot 
be moved to the next level of competition for Show/Trial 1. In this case, if any exhibitor chooses to compete in 
Show/Trial 1, they must do so in the lower class. Dogs completing title requirements at Show/Trial 1 may move 
to the next level of competition for Show/Trials 2, provided they follow the club’s class change/move up policy 
and the next level class is available and has not begun. 

 

Class change requests or corrections to any entry form must be done in writing. The exhibitor must complete an 
official UKC Class Change/Entry Correction Form as provided by the club. The Event Secretary/Manager must 
attach the form to the original entry. Class changes must be completed no later than one-half hour prior to the 
start of any regular judging on the day of the Show/Trial. In the case of a club running two shows/trials 
simultaneously, the club must post its class change policy at the entry table and the Event Secretary/Manager’s 
table on the Day of the show or publish the class change policy in the Judging schedule. 

 

Owners who move their dog to the next level of competition prior to being notified by UKC that their dog has met 
the title requirement do so at their own risk. If the owner’s records are incorrect, all passing searches and points 
earned while competing at the higher level of competition shall be disallowed. 

 

Section 15. Judging Schedule. Start times will be published for all Nosework events. At pre-entry only trials, 
the start of judging begins after the handlers meeting and familiarization of the search area. For all other trials, 
the start of judging begins after the handlers meeting and familiarization of the testing area or as soon as possible 
thereafter if there are many day-of-trial entries. No dogs are to be judged prior to the published start time in the 
Upcoming Events listing at www.ukcdogs.com or in the Judging schedule. 

 

Dogs must be run in numerical order, according to the armband number assigned by the Event 
Secretary/Manager, except that a judge has the discretion to allow a dog to be judged out of sequence at the 
request of the handler; in all other instances, dogs should be present at their designated area at the time of 
judging. Judges are not required to wait for dogs. If other events are being held in conjunction with Nosework 
trials, it is preferred that Nosework be done in a separate area from any other events due to the nature of scent 
discrimination that is being performed by the dog. If an event site can only accommodate one exhibition area 
and there are multiple events scheduled, Nosework must be held first. 

 

If the published judge cancels their assignment prior to the day of the event, the club must make every 


reasonable effort to notify exhibitors of the change and offer refunds to all pre-entered exhibitors who submit a 
written request for refund of their entry fee(s). Judge changes must be viewable at the event site during event 
hours. If, on the day of the event, an judge is unable to start or complete his/her assignment, the Event 
Chairperson must appoint an emergency replacement judge. 

 

Section 16. Officiating Procedures. The judge may use whatever reasonable procedures they deem 
necessary to evaluate the dogs in an effective and efficient manner. UKC Judges are encouraged to discuss 
placements of hides with exhibitors after the trial is complete and all dogs have run. Judges may not ask an 
exhibitor any questions regarding the dog being evaluated other than age or search/alert details. The judge 
is responsible to verify that the passes are accurate and sign the judge’s book before awards are handed 
out. Upon the completion of the judge’s assignment, the judge is required to return the completed judge’s 
books to the Event Secretary/Manager. The Event Secretary/Manager must provide the judge with one copy 
of the signed judge’s book prior to the judge leaving the trial grounds, on the day of their last assignment. 
The judge is required to keep all their books on file for a period of one year after their assignment. 

 

Section 17. Facility Requirements. All Nosework working areas must have firm and safe footing for dog and 
handler. Grass surfaces must be mowed so that the grass is short and as level as possible. Working areas may 
be designated as such, or marked off with caution type tape, paint, cones, ring ropes, gates, chalk lines or any 
clear visual demarcation acceptable to the CO. Staging areas must be provided for exhibitors waiting to compete. 
The staging area must be monitored by a steward. To facilitate the judge designing a search area that fits the 
working area, the club is responsible for providing them with the exact dimensions of the working area no less 
than 60 days prior to the first day of the trial. After determining the size and shape of the trial area on which the 
elements are to be located, the judge should select appropriate search patterns or search areas that are 
compatible with that location. Specific patterns or search areas are not required in the designing of Nosework 
courses. Not all Nosework search patterns and components are going to be the same. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 2 

PERFORMANCE, HANDLING & EQUIPMENT 

 

Section 1. Checking In. The exhibitor is expected to know the scheduled trial starting time, be present and 
ready to go when they are called. Upon arrival, the exhibitor should check in to determine the dog’s number, and 
the order of competing. If the exhibitor believes they may have ring conflicts or they are handling more than one 
dog, they must notify the stewards of possible conflicts before the class starts so that accommodations may be 
arranged. The judge may allow the exhibitor to show out of order. Judges are not required to wait for dogs. 

 

Section 2. Warm-Ups. Exhibitors may elect to warm up their dogs prior to exhibiting. Warm-ups are to be kept 
simple and must not interfere with another exhibitor’s performance in the search area. Training on the trial 
grounds, except in the designated warm up area of a Licensed Nosework trial, is not permitted. A host club may 
elect to set an area or ring aside for warm-ups. 

 

The warm-up area must not disturb or interfere with the search areas. It is recommended that the warm-up ring 
be in a separate facility or area and consist of three to five boxes. There will be at least one identified hide in the 
designated warm-up area. One handler/dog team at a time can use this area. Dogs on deck will have priority. 
Clubs should periodically monitor warm-up areas to be certain boxes are maintained and not contaminated to 
the point of being unusable. All rules governing Nosework trials shall apply in the warm-up area. If there is not 
designated warm-up area, exhibitors may use an area outside of trial grounds to warm-up their dogs if the handler 
and dog are not disruptive to competition and the dog is on a leash that is being held by the handler. 

 

Section 3. Dog Abuse. Any person who observes a dog being abused while in the warm-up area, or anywhere 
else on the trial grounds, must report it to a member of the trial committee or an officer of the host club. A member 
of the trial committee or officer of the host club who becomes aware of a dog being abused or having been 
previously abused on the trial grounds, must consider it misconduct and treat the incident in accordance with 
the UKC Misconduct and Discipline Guidelines. A judge who becomes aware that a dog is being or has been 
abused in the warm-up ring must not allow the handler to compete and must report the matter in accordance 
with the UKC Misconduct and Discipline Guidelines. 

 

Section 4. Requirements for Equipment provided by the Club. A club hosting a UKC licensed Nosework trial 
must provide the following equipment: 

 

Search Area Supplies. Items such as pens, pencils, calculators, and clipboards must be available for use at 
the search area by the judge(s) and stewards. 

 

Scent Kit. All odors should be 100% Pure Therapeutic Grade Essential oils, consisting of all necessary 
and approved odors. Only odors used at the trial need to be present at the trial. The odors are as follows: 

• Novice. Birch Sweet Oil – Betula Lenta 
• Advanced. Aniseed Oil – Pimpinella Anisum 
• Superior. Clove Oil – Eugenia Caryophylatta or Syzgiium Aromaticum 
• Master. Myrrh Oil – Commiphora Myrrha 
• Elite. Vetiver Oil – Vetiveria Zizanoides. 


 

Scent Receptacle: A receptacle that holds the scent aid and prevents the aid from coming into direct 
contact with any object or surface in the search area but allows odor to escape. Receptacles may not be 
glass. If plastic is used for scent receptacles, the scent aid must be removed from the plastic container 
for storage. (Examples of receptacles include, but are not limited to, plastic straw, empty lip balm tube, 
metal tin, etc.). Receptacles should have enough openings to ensure adequate ventilation of odor 
permeation. 

 

 

 


Preparation of Odors/scenting aids. Cotton swabs made of 100% cotton with bonded paper, commonly known 
as Q-tips© are used as the aid to place the target odor. Scenting aids for hides may be prepared up to 24 - 48 
hours prior to the trial or be prepared on the day of the trial. If prepared prior to the trial, aids should be stored in 
a manner that will not alter or degrade the quality and character of the oils. 1ml plastic pipettes are 
recommended, but not required, for use in measuring the appropriate amount of essential oil for the hide. Nitrile 
gloves should be worn when preparing and setting hides. 

• When hides are prepared in advance, no more than 2 aids (each end of the cotton swab is considered 
1 aid) will be allowed in any hide container for any search, with no more than 1 drop (0.05ml) of the 
specific target odor placed upon each end of the cotton swab for each hide. 
• Hides prepared the day of the trial will be limited to 1 aid, (1 end of the cotton swab) allowed in any 
hide container for any search with no more than 1 drop (0.05ml) of the specific target odor placed on 
the end of each cotton swab for each hide. 
• Scenting aids must be prepared for each trial. 
• All aids, once set in the search area, must have a wait time of at least 10 minutes once set prior to 
the Dog In White (DIW), and the first dog running the class. 
• Scenting aid (cotton swab) – One (1) cotton swab cut in half. Both ends may be scented with the 
same odor but once cut in half would count as 2 scenting aids. 
• Scenting aids must be sealed in glass jars when not being used and properly stored away from the 
search and/or practice areas. There is no limit as to how many aids can be prepared if each different 
odor has a separate sealed glass container for storage. Scenting aids can be re-used (if they have 
not been damaged or contaminated) and stored in sealed glass jars but must be prepared as directed 
prior to a trial. 




 

Container Search Boxes. Containers must be uniform in size and cannot specify anywhere on the container 
for use by any shipping industry (government or private, i.e. Fed-Ex, USPS). Containers must be at least 12 
inches by 9 inches with any container not being less than three (3) inches tall or over eight (8) inches tall. 
Additional pre-loaded (prepared the day of the trial) or blank containers must be available for replacement if any 
of the containers become damaged or contaminated. The bottoms of the boxes must be taped shut. When 
hosting any Handler Discrimination and/or container trials, one steward should be designated for the care of the 
odor box. Specific instructions on responsibility of this position will be found in the stewarding chapter of this 
rulebook. 

 

Interior Search Items. Items that may be used in an interior search include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Stationary and/or fixed objects such as furniture including chairs, tables, kitchen counters, storage drawers, file 
cabinets, desks or children’s toys (provided they are large enough to place a concealed hide), closets and so 
forth. Search areas may be natural or artificially built with the required number of items for each search. 

 

Exterior Search Items. Items that may be used in an exterior search include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Any such items that are also used for Interior Searches that may be found outside, additionally stationary and/or 
fixed objects such as playground equipment, picnic tables, barrels and so forth. Search areas may be natural or 
artificially built with the required number of items for each search. 

 

Hide Location Limits (Interior/Exterior) 

Novice: No less than 8 and no more than 12 potential hide locations. 

Advanced: No less than 10 and no more than 14 potential hide locations. 

Superior: No less than 14 and no more than 20 total potential hide locations, including distractions. 

Master: No less than 16 and no more than 24 total potential hide locations, including distractions.’ 

Elite: No less than 18 and no more than 26 potential hide locations, including distractions. 

 

Distractions. All food and toy distractions must be hidden so the handler does not know where the 
distraction is located. The club is responsible for providing distractions for the Advanced, Superior, 
Master and Elite Element classes. Judge’s have the option of using their own distractions instead of 
those provided by the club. A variety of items must be available for the judge to choose from. Toys, food and/or 
other materials used for distractions must be specifically non-toxic to dogs (Toxic items that are not to be used 


include, but are not limited to, chocolate, raisins, grapes, avocado, xylitol). When food is used as a distraction, 
the food must be contained so that the dog cannot eat it. The judge will determine which items are appropriate 
for each element and trial. Beginning in the Master Class, an exposed distraction may be used if it mimics 
another object such as a stuffed animal or statue that looks like a realistic animal or person. Beginning 
in the Elite level, a person, other than the judge may be present inside the search area. They may be 
standing or sitting. They may casually look at the dog but must not speak to the dog. During the search, 
Judges are not to discuss what type of distraction is present or where it is located. Judges may discuss 
the location and type of distraction after the trial. 

 

Prohibited locations, items, articles and/or obstacles. Though a search area will mimic a real-life search 
environment where people and other animals may have been, the search areas may contain unidentified 
distractions or hazards. The club is to make every effort to use areas that are free of dangerous obstacles. 
Search areas should have safe footing for both the handlers and dogs. Locations that have unsafe areas such 
as broken glass, nails, twisted metal, or sharp protruding objects must not be used. Items, obstacles or articles 
that are not secure or are unstable such as, but not limited to, a bicycle or stacked drawers that are not secured, 
may not be used in a nosework trial. 

 

Stopwatches and Timers. At least two stopwatches that record time to 1/100th of a second must be available 
for each Nosework search area. Search times are used for placements and to break ties for placements. 

 

Vehicles. Vehicles are only required when a club is offering a Vehicle Element search. The number of vehicles 
required will depend on the classes being offered. Vehicle types are described within each class. To be 
designated as a vehicle, it must be used for transporting passengers or things by land, water, or air. Vehicles 
include cars, vans, motor homes, motorcycles, ATV’s, golf carts, tractors or trailers that are designed to be used 
in combination with a vehicle described above and/or towed on the highway as well as horse drawn wagons or 
buggies. In addition, any mechanical devices on wheels mainly for use on highways is allowable. Vehicles and/or 
vehicle types are prohibited and may not be used in a vehicle search include but are not limited to moped’s, 
motorized bicycles, traditional pedal bicycles, pony carts, carts or vehicles propelled by human power. Toy cars 
and/or toy trucks and/or toy tractors and/or big wheels, scooters, skateboards or children’s wagons and other 
such toys do not meet the description of a vehicle and therefore are also prohibited from being used in a vehicle 
search. 

 

Timing Searches: 

a. Search Time: The search time will be utilized during all nosework classes from Novice through Elite and 
for all Handler Discrimination classes. The search time is the actual accumulated time on the stopwatch 
that the dog is actively searching, from the time any part of the dog/handler team crosses a start line; the 
handler gives a search command; or is committed to search, to each call of alert. For Novice and 
Advanced Nosework classes and all Handler Discrimination classes, only one timer is used that tracks 
both the search time and the element time. For Superior through Elite, (or all classes with more than one 
hide), this is the amount of time the dog is actively searching allowing for the stop and re-start of timing. 
This is the time that is recorded in the judge’s book. 


 

b. Element Time: This is the allowed time given for each search element. It is not the actual time the dog is 
searching for any class that has more than one hide. The Element time is utilized in The Superior, Master 
and Elite levels and is responsible to time the overall Element time. The Element time is the accumulated 
time on the stopwatch from the time any part of the dog/handler team crosses the start line, or begins to 
search, to the time when the handler makes the FINAL call of alert or finish. This time is not stopped and 
re-started but continues to run for the entire time the dog is in the search area or until the designated 
allowed time is reached. Searches are not allowed to go over the designated Element Times. 


 

Hides. The club must provide enough objects (also known as hides) to exchange the objects/hides that have 
been used in each class. All objects and vehicles used for placing hides for an Interior, an Exterior or a Vehicle 
search may only be used once in a class, during a trial weekend, to protect the integrity of the hides for all 
classes. Previously used permanent areas or vehicles from the same weekend of trials cannot be marked, 


or cleaned in some manner (such as cleaning the area with vinegar or placing tape over the area) and 
then be reused. 

 

In a Container search, blank containers may be reused if the integrity of the box has not been compromised. A 
fresh/new container must be used when changing hides between classes. 

 

In a Vehicle search, blank vehicles may be reused provided they have not been used to place a hide. Once a 
vehicle has held a hide for any class, it may no longer be used on that weekend. 

 

Vehicle Hide Height Restrictions: All hides on regular vehicles (Example: personal passenger vehicles such 
as cars, vans, trucks, etc.) will be no more than three (3) feet high. All those designated as “other than vehicles” 
will be allowed the four (4) foot height in Master and the five (5) foot height in Elite (Example: tractors, trailers, 
golf carts, etc.). 

 

Section 5. Required Equipment for Handler. The following outlines the equipment that is required to be 
provided by and/or restricted in use by the exhibitor. 

• Collars, Harnesses and/or Leashes. UKC exhibitors are responsible for providing a collar and a leash 
and/or harness for each dog entered. The dog may wear flat collars, limited slip, martingale type collars, 
and harnesses. Collars and/or harnesses must properly fit the dog and be approved by the judge. Collar 
tags that are not attached or riveted directly to the collar, or any items hanging from the collar are 
prohibited in the Nosework search area. Studded, “pinch” or “prong” collars of any type are prohibited in 
the Nosework search area. Leashes may be made of fabric or leather, martingale or flexi, and must be 
of enough length to safely control the dog. The judge will evaluate all equipment prior to the dog’s 
individual performance. If the judge denies a piece of equipment the exhibitor must remove this piece 
prior to competing. Electronic collars are not permitted on the trial grounds of a UKC licensed 
performance event. 
• Gloves used in Handler Discrimination Classes. Gloves used in HD classes must be made of cotton and 
may be of any color. 
• Articles used in Handler Discrimination Classes. Handlers must provide one personal item such as keys, 
a shoe, a sock, a shirt and so forth for this class. The personal item cannot be a glove, an under garment 
such as underwear, must be free of food and must fit inside a cardboard box that is 12 x 9 x 3. The 
personal item must fit inside the box without any parts of the item showing. 
• Clothing and Dog Accessories. Articles of clothing that are used for protection purposes such as, but 
not limited to, elastic ties, small bows (as allowed within a breed’s standard) or small plain barrettes to 
keep the hair out of the dog’s eyes, booties, or protective clothing may be used on the dog so long as it 
does not interfere with the dog’s performance or affect the integrity of the hides. Any accessory or apparel 
that the judge believes will interfere with the performance or trial must be removed prior to the dog 
entering the search areas. 
• Items of adornment. Items placed or attached to the dog for adornment such as, but not limited to, 
bandanas or jewelry are not allowed to be worn by the dog while in the Nosework search area. The 
judge’s decision in the matter is final. 
• Reactive Dog Bandanas. Specific colored bandanas and/or collars used to indicate a dog is reactive to 
other dogs, people, or its surroundings is strictly prohibited. Dogs must be able to be managed safely by 
their handlers using regular equipment described in this rulebook without the use of reactive dog 
bandanas/collars. This is the point at which dogs are acceptable on the trial grounds of UKC Nosework 
events and will have the opportunity to participate. Judges must excuse dogs showing reactive behaviors 
from the Nosework search area and may be asked to leave the trial grounds by the Event Committee. 
No refund of entry fees will be made. 
• Prohibited Items. Active cell phones and video recording devices are prohibited on the exhibitor and dog 
during their search. Exhibitors are prohibited from smoking or vaping during their search. Judges may 
ask exhibitors or spectators to leave the search area if they are smoking or vaping. 


 

 


Section 6. Commands, Signals, Orders. A command is a spoken instruction given by the handler to the dog 
and may be used by the handler to convey instructions to the dog at any time. A signal is a hand or hand and 
arm movement that may be used by the handler at any time to convey instructions to the dog. The dog’s name 
may be used at any time and in any combination with commands and/or signals. The judges may use signals to 
convey instructions to the handler. An order is the instruction given by the judge to the handler. Orders may be 
spoken or given by signal. It is the responsibility of the handler to ensure that the dogs “alert” behavior(s) are 
listed and clear on the score sheet for each trial. 

Section 7. Handling Procedures. All dogs at a licensed Nosework trial shall be on a leash. During the Handlers’ 
Briefing, the Judge will determine if the search must be completed with the dog on leash or if they will allow the 
handler to choose to complete the search off leash. If the search must be completed on leash, then all handlers 
must run the search on-leash without exception. The judge’s decision is final. Every dog must enter and leave 
the Nosework official search area on a leash. Failure to leave the official search area with the dog on leash shall 
be penalized a fault. It is recommended that handlers wear rubber-soled, closed-toe shoes. Clothes should be 
neat and comfortable with safety in mind. Handlers can wear special training clothing or equipment such as 
vests, hats, bait bags, etc. 

 

Small Dogs (normally 15’’ and under), may be picked up by their handler during a search to investigate an 
inaccessible area of interest under the following conditions: (Judges may fault and/or NQ a handler if these 
conditions are not met). 

During the Search: 

• As a reaction to odor, the dog must have exhibited a noticeable, readable, physical change in behavior, 
a pattern of behavior that follows the dogs initial reaction to a trained odor, or a dog displaying enthusiasm 
and a desire to remain and trace the trained odor to source. 
• The handler must not touch anything within the search area and the dog cannot be physically placed on 
any item within the search area. 
• Dogs in Master and Elite must exhibit the required alert behavior noted on the entry form. 


 

Section 8. Repeating a Search. A judge may allow an exhibitor to repeat a search or element in its entirety only 
when the dog’s performance was unfairly hindered by extraordinary circumstances over which the handler had 
no control. Judges may only allow this when it will not give an unfair advantage to any dog. No dog will be allowed 
to repeat only a part of a search unless it is a search that is conducted in more than one area; in which case the 
judge may choose to repeat only the part of the search in which the extraordinary circumstance occurred (i.e., 
the third hide in a master class in the exterior element). 

 

Section 9. Control of the Dog. Exhibitors are always expected to keep their dog under control. The Event 
Committee may expel from the trial grounds any person whose failure to control a dog interferes with officiating 
or with the ability of other exhibitors to present their dogs. A dog that shows extreme aggression toward people 
or equipment on the grounds, in the search areas, or during the scored performance must be excused and will 
not receive a passing search. The judge must excuse a dog whose behavior in the search area is so unruly (not 
under the handler’s control) that it indicates to the judge it is unable to compete. 

 

A dog that leaves the search area and does not return to the handler during the search must not receive a 
passing search and may not be allowed to complete the element at the discretion of the judges. Dogs can bark 
and/or whine during any exercise and will not be penalized for such. 

 

A Judge must disqualify a dog that bites or attempts to bite any person (including the handler) or that attacks or 
attempts to attack. A dog that is disqualified for attacking or attempting to bite may not continue to compete at 
that event and must not be entered or shown at subsequent events unless reinstated by UKC. The judge’s 
decision is final in all disqualifications. The judge must mark the reason on the score sheet which must then be 
recorded in the official results book for all disqualifications. In such cases, clubs and/or judges must follow the 
procedures as outlined in the Official UKC Rules for All-Breed events, Misconduct and Discipline; Chapter 1, 
section 13. 

 

Dogs disqualified for attacking are immediately rendered ineligible to compete at any UKC events and the 


exhibitor shall forfeit all entry fees for any event where the dog has yet to compete. The exhibitor must secure 
the dog(s) and remain on the premises until the “Disqualified for Attacking” form has been completed in 
accordance with The Official Rules for All-Breed Events, Chapter 1, Section 13. 

 

Section 10. Bait and Baiting. Exhibitors can bring conditioned reinforcers (rewards such as food and/or toys 
and/or clickers) into the Nosework search areas. Training vests, bait pouches, fanny packs or other items that a 
dog may associate with training are also allowed. The judge may inspect all reinforcers at their discretion for 
approval before entrance into the search area. A dog that times out or false alerts at the Novice Level only, will 
be allowed to be shown the hide location and rewarded before leaving the ring unless the Novice dog is excused 
for fouling the ring. Approved methods of rewarding dogs are as follows: 

• Food rewards: Food must be offered away from the source by at least two feet. It must not be offered 
at or over the target odor source to prevent contamination of the hide. If food is dropped within two feet 
of the search area, a fault will be issued for every infraction. 
• Toy rewards: All toys should be clean. Toys must not be thrown at source but may be given to the dog 
and must be at least two feet away from the source of odor. A fault may be issued if the toy is given too 
close to the source and causes contamination, or if it moves the object that contains the target odor. 
Handlers that throw their toy, regardless if it is away from the source of odor will be assessed a fault. 


 

Section 11. Search Areas and Trial Grounds Cleanup. Exhibitors are required to clean up after their dog if it 
fouls the search area or the trial grounds. The steward may bring cleaning supplies to the exhibitor and may hold 
the dog while the owner cleans the area. Any exhibitor who fails to clean up after their dog may be directed by 
the Event Committee to leave the event grounds. A dog that fouls the search area must not receive a passing 
score and must be immediately excused from the search area. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 3 

SEARCH / AREA SIZE AND ELEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

 

Section 1. Search Area Requirements. The surface for any search area must provide adequate, firm and safe 
footing for dog and handler. Grass surfaces must be mowed so that the grass is short. Search areas may be 
within a larger area, and/or nested and must be marked off as the designated search areas with traffic cones, 
caution tape, ring gates etc. 

• Handler Discrimination and Container Search areas. Handler Discrimination and Container Trials 
must be held in a designated area that has been marked off. The search area size of all Nosework classes 
must be at least 40 feet by 50 feet (or 2,000 sq. ft). The size of all Master Hander Discrimination classes 
must be at least 40 feet by 60 feet (or 2,400 sq. ft.). The distance between containers must be a minimum 
of two feet (24 inches). The areas where containers are to be set may be marked on the floor with chalk 
lines or tape lines along two sides of the boxes. For the Superior through Elite Nosework classes, 
containers may be set as designated in one or more rows within a search area or in any other 
configuration within the designated search area. For the Master Handler Discrimination class containers 
are set in a scattered pattern. There must be a minimum of three feet (36 inches) between rows and at 
least five feet (60 inches) from the edge of the ringside barriers. 
• Interior Search Areas. Small rooms such as a bathroom, kitchen, or office may be used for an Interior 
search. These areas must be large enough to accommodate the dog, handler and judge and allow for 
ease of movement within the room for the searching team. Other areas such as a warehouse or room 
sized environments are also acceptable. Single search areas may consist of adjoining rooms, or an area 
marked off in a larger interior space. Areas being used for Interior searches must be clearly identified and 
entry into the search areas are to be restricted. 
• Exterior Search Areas. These areas can consist of any area that is outside. They can include, but are 
not limited to, exterior walls of buildings, parking lots, grassy fields, courtyards, etc. Dogs will be required 
to search under all weather conditions on the trial day. Exterior search areas will be clearly identified by 
flags, cones, tape, gates, etc., and entry into the search areas are to be restricted. 
• Vehicle Search Areas. Vehicle search areas may be indoors or outdoors. If indoors there must be 
enough room for all exhibitors and judges to move about comfortably and to accommodate all vehicles 
necessary. Outdoor vehicle search areas must be flat and free of debris. When searches are being 
conducted on asphalt or pavement, Judges should consider the surface temperature and relocate the 
search area should temperatures become too hot to safely conduct searches. 
• Spectators. When possible, accommodations for spectators should be made available. This may be 
done by designating and area or gallery. If these accommodations are available and spectators can 
observe the dogs run, judges or club judges should not ask spectators to leave the area for certain dogs 
or by request of the handler. Spectators are to receive a briefing regarding how Nosework trials work, of 
what they can and cannot do and the importance of not revealing the location of the hides. Exhibitors 
who are entered in the trial may not observe any class in which they are entered until after they have 
completed their run. 


 

Section 2. Element Requirements. For each element listed below, the odors are to be placed inside a closeable 
scent receptacle (except for boxes used for container searches), with air holes to allow scent to be released into 
the area and securely taped or fastened to a surface. Scent receptacles may be magnetic or have magnets 
attached to them. Scent aids should never come in direct contact with any surface or item that is being used 
within the search area. 

 

• Containers: Containers for searches will be cardboard boxes. Handlers are not permitted to touch or 
move any containers. Dogs that walk on, sit on, or move containers may be faulted if the judge feels the 
dog is compromising the environment or exhibiting an aggressive alert. For Containers only, odors that 
are not placed into a scent receptacle must be taped securely to the side of the container. Odors that are 
placed inside a plastic or metal sealed container must have air holes to allow scent to be released from 
the primary container into the boxes. 


 


• Interior Building. Searches are typically done indoors in enclosed room-sized environments. Blank 
rooms / areas can only be presented in Superior, Master, and Elite classes. During the Handlers Briefing, 
the Judge will determine if the search must be completed with the dog on leash or if they will allow the 
handler to choose to complete the search off leash. If the search must be completed on leash, then all 
handlers must run the search on-leash without exception. The judge’s decision is final. 
• Exterior Area. Hides must be within designated areas, but dogs and handlers may move outside the 
area as part of their search pattern. Search times will be determined by factors that include, but are not 
limited to, weather conditions, area size, difficulty, and distractors. 
• Vehicles. The search will only be done on the exterior of any vehicle. The handler will never open a 
vehicle door for their dog or direct the dog into or under any vehicle to locate a hide. The search should 
be conducted on leash. If the exhibitor feels that the leash will interfere with their dog’s ability to effectively 
search all vehicles, they may request to complete this portion of the test off leash. It is the sole discretion 
of the judge to allow an exhibitor to compete without a leash, the judge’s decision is final. Dogs that use 
their feet or paw for alerts must wear booties of some type to protect the vehicle. Handlers will be 
assessed a fault for any form of aggressive alert on a vehicle at the judge’s discretion. 


 

 

Section 3. Running Trials and Search Areas. 

 

Search Areas. Search areas cannot be adjacent to one other if odor has been placed in each area. Search 
areas can be built/nested such as the case with interior and exterior trials, but odor can only be present in one 
search area. Judges cannot place an odor in one search area and then place another odor, either the same odor 
or a different one, adjacent to the working search area without a permanent type of barrier. The only exceptions 
are the Superior, Master, and Elite Interior searches that require more than one search area within that class 
and allows dogs to move from one search area into the other and back. 

 

Running Trials. Trials can be run as single trials per day or two trials per day. They can be run either one after 
the other, back-to-back, or concurrently if the space and time requirements are met. 

 

One Trial Per Day. When running one trial per day, clubs need to be aware of space and time requirements and 
adhere to those requirements for each level. 

 

Two Trials Per Day. If two trials are being run at the same time, clubs need to be aware of space requirements 
as well as how to set up the running of classes for smooth transitions between trials and the allowable judging 
and trial hours. There are three ways to run more than one trial per day as follows: 

• All of trial one with all levels hosted can be run before the beginning of trial two. 
o Example: Club is hosting Container trials, Novice through Elite in two trials. Trial one would be 
run in its entirety, with all classes Novice through Elite before beginning Trial two. At the entire 
conclusion of Trial one, Trial two would begin. 



• Running each level of each class offered for Trial one and then running each level of each class offered 
for Trial two immediately following one another. This is the most efficient way to run more than one trial 
per day when using only one judge. 
o For Container Trials only, the same target odor box can be used for Trial two if it has not been 
compromised. It is simply moved to a different location in the line from Trial one to Trial two. 
o For interior, exterior and vehicle trials, odor from Trial one must be totally removed from the area 
before Trial two for each level begins. Search areas can be nested as described in the rules and 
built upon, however only the odors for each level being judged can be placed during judging. 
 Example: Containers Novice through Elite. The order of classes would be: 
 Trial 1 Novice Containers followed by Trial 2 Novice Containers. 
 Trial 1 Advanced Containers followed by Trial 2 Advanced Containers. 
 Trial 1 Superior Containers followed by Trail 2 Superior Containers 
 Trial 1 Master Containers followed by Trial 2 Master Containers 
 Trial 1 Elite Containers followed by Trial 2 Elite Containers 






• Running Trial 1 and Trial 2 concurrently. If the club has the resources and judges to run Trial 1 and Trial 



2 concurrentlythereare restrictions on howtheareas can be used.If odor is out and placedforbothtrials,the trial one and trial two areascannot be adjacent to one anotherwithout a permanenttype ofbarrier or at least 50 feet of open-air space between them from the perimeter of one search area to 
another. If clubschoose to run trials concurrently and use only one judge who follows the exhibitorsfromone searchareatotheother,theyneedtobeaware oftimerestraintswithin the judgingday.Thisistheleastefficientway to run trials.

oForExample: The club cannot set up a trial one search area and then immediately set up the trialtwo search area adjacentto it without a permanenttype of barrier or the 50feet of open-air spacebetween them when odor is placed at the same time in both search areas.
An exhibitor cannotrun their dog in trial one and then justmove overto trial two within thesame area.
Iftwo judgesareused,trialone andtrialtwomustnotberuninadjacentareaswithoutapermanenttype of barrier between them or withinat least50 feet of open-air space.
Each search area mustmeetthe regulationsforsize and must be specifically marked withsome type ofring marker,ring gates,ropes, walls, etc., around the perimeter of each ring.
OFFICIAL NOSEWORK RULEBOOK18


CHAPTER 4 

JUDGING PROCEDURES 

 

Section 1. Handlers’ Briefing. The judge will hold a short briefing session prior to the handlers entering the 
search areas. This will allow time for the judge to review the rules and/or explain any variables in the element 
search area. This may be combined with the time allotted for the familiarization of the course. The judge will 
cover the number of hides for each element, with the exception of the Elite classes, the boundaries of the search 
areas, the maximum time allowed in each element, and will explain any areas where dogs will be allowed to 
search off-leash. The judge should explain that dog and handler teams may cross search area boundaries 
without penalty. 

 

Section 2. Handler Familiarization Without Dog. Immediately following the Handlers’ Briefing, all handlers of 
the class will be permitted to view each element of the search area. Handlers are not allowed to enter the actual 
defined search area at any time other than when they are competing. The stewards and judge(s) will be present 
in the search area during this period to supervise. Judges will answer questions from handlers at this time, and 
during a post-trial question and answer period if the Certifying Judge holds a de-briefing after the trial. Start lines, 
boundaries and times will be indicated to the handlers during this time. Search areas are meant to be like real 
life situations and as free as possible of hazardous features. Handlers understand that trial areas may not be 
perfect or pristine and there may be hazards unknown to the club. The familiarization is an opportunity to address 
any concerns with the judges. It is the responsibility of the handler to determine if the area is safe for their dog. 
No refunds will be issued if the handler chooses to withdraw from the trial after familiarization. Handlers may not 
observe other participants runs in the element(s) they are entered in on the same trial day until after they have 
run if entered in the same class. 

 

Section 3. Alerts. Alerts are not required to be a formal obedience type response, but the behavior must be 
recognizable to the judge and communicate a decision has been made on the part of the dog. If a handler calls 
an Alert that is incorrect, searching will end. During the Handlers’ Briefing, except for the Elite classes, the judge 
will announce how many hides will be in the class. Handlers are required to call “Alert” for every hide they believe 
the dog has found. For Superior, Master and/or Elite classes, when searching multiple rooms and/or areas, a 
handler does not have to call “Clear” when moving from room to room or area to area. Handlers in the Elite class 
are required to call “Finish” when they believe the last hide has been found. If all hides are correctly identified 
and no more than one fault has been assessed, a passing search will be awarded. If a handler calls an Alert that 
is incorrect, searching will end. If a verbal communication is not possible due to environmental factors or a 
handler’s disability, the handler must inform the judge of the alternate confirmation, such as an obvious hand 
signal. Judges have complete control and final say over all matters in the search areas. 

 

When an “Alert” is called but it is not clear to the judge that the dog has communicated the exact location to the 
handler, the judge may ask “Where?” The handler must be able to identify the location of the source of odor 
without giving the dog any additional commands and/or gestures. The handler, without touching anything, must 
indicate the location to the judge by pointing to and describing the location within a reasonable distance of the 
hide. The judge may use their discretion to allow the “Alert” call dependent upon if the hide is accessible or 
inaccessible to the dog, as well as allowing for environmental factors such as wind, temperature, and humidity. 

 

Accessible Hides: A hide in a location where the dog can reach the source of odor with its nose. 

 

Inaccessible Hides: A hide that is not close enough, or available, for the dog to reach the source to pinpoint the 
exact location of the hide. The judge will be looking for the dog to get as close as possible to the hide location. 
The judge does not need to ask “Where?”, if the dog is clearly indicating the appropriate area. If the dog is unsure 
or has not indicated clearly, the judge should ask “Where?” For a hide that is inaccessible for all dogs regardless 
of their size, such as inside a file cabinet drawer or behind an object that is against a wall, the handler must point 
to, and describe the location that is the closest the dog can possibly get to. The judge’s decision regarding if the 
alert is acceptable is always final. 

 


Section 4. Automatic Non-Passing Search. During any search, the handler is not allowed to kick or 
intentionally move any containers from their original position or move any articles out of the way in any search. 
Should this happen, the team is to be assessed a non-passing search. 

 

Section 5. Dog In White. For all classes, a qualified, non-competing dog and handler team shall perform all the 
exercises in the same manner that will occur during the competition. The DIW should check the entire search 
area to ensure old hides have not been accidentally placed in the search area. This is to allow the judge to verify 
the integrity of the hides and correct any unforeseen problems. It is acceptable for a team that has already 
competed to perform the dog in white for another class, provided they will not be competing in that class. If, in 
unusual situations, a DIW is not available, the first dog in the running order will complete the search. 
The run must occur after the briefing and immediately prior to the other dogs in the class. If this dog 
encounters difficulties such that the judge needs to adjust the hide location(s), that dog will be re-run at 
the end of the class, with no penalty. 

 

Section 6. Judge. A licensed Nosework Judge is required to preside over all Nosework trials. If more than one 
Judge will be officiating, each Judge will be responsible for overseeing their own trial or portion of the trial to 
ensure that all aspects of the trial run smoothly and that all hides are placed properly. The decision of the Judge 
is final. 

 

Section 7. Start Times and Timing. Each dog/handler team should be ready and waiting on deck before their 
turn for each search. The judge will verify that the timing steward(s) are ready prior to allowing the dog and 
handler teams to begin their search. All dog and handler teams must initially begin behind a clearly designated 
Start Line. Judging and timing begins when any part of the dog or handler cross any part of the start line. When 
timing Superior, Master, and Elite classes, one timer (search timer) will stop and restart the timer, while the other 
timer (element timer) remains timing. The search timer, when multiple hides are present, is stopped when the 
handler calls “Alert” or “Finish” and is re-started, when applicable, as soon as the handler gives a search 
command, or the team makes a commitment to begin searching again. Element timers may give a warning when 
30 seconds are remaining in all classes. They may also give a 10-second warning in the Superior, Master and 
Elite classes. Timers will make every effort to give the warnings, but situations may arise when a warning is not 
given. It is the responsibility of the handler to be aware of the time that is remaining during their search. 

 

As the team begins, the judge will position themselves so that they can easily view the performance of the dog 
and handler team without interfering. The judge will not assist the handler under any circumstances. Questions 
or concerns should be addressed with the judge during the handlers’ meeting and familiarization of the testing 
area. Once the trial has begun, any questions must be directed to the stewards. Judges may clarify these 
questions if needed. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Section 8. Maximum Element Times. Times for each element will be assigned, announced and discussed in 
the handlers’ meeting. Maximum assigned element times for all classes will be determined by the specific 
competition and should not be exceeded. The actual search time will be recorded as the time for the dog’s 
search. The dog must locate every hide and the handler must call every alert within the allotted element time to 
receive a passing search. Each search requires that the handler state “alert” to stop the actual search time. 

Below are the maximum element times for each class. 

 





Elements 



Container 



Interior 



Exterior 



Vehicle 



Handler Discrimination 





Target Odor 



Maximum times for each class (minutes) 





Novice 



3 



3 



3 



3 



Novice 



3 





Advance 



4 



4 



4 



4 



Advance 



3 





Superior 



5 



5 



5 



5 



Excellent 



3 





Master 



6 



6 



6 



6 



Master 



4 





Elite 



6 



6 



6 



6 



 



 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Section 9. Faults. A handler/dog team may receive no more than one (1) fault and still receive a passing search. 
Judges will not call any faults during the performance but may inform the handler of a fault after the search is 
finished. Faults are given for infractions and incorrect calls. Faults will affect placements in the competition. 
Faults can be, but are not limited to: 

 

• Handling errors. Any action or cue that causes the canine or dog team to perform incorrectly. Pulling a 
dog off odor, intentionally blocking an odor, or calling “alert” on a hide that has already been found would 
all be examples of handler errors. Faults will not be given to minor infractions or poor handling such as 
tangling leash, mistakenly blocking odors, etc. 


 

• Incorrect Response. In the Master and Elite classes, if the dog’s alert behavior exhibited during the trial 
is not the same as the alert behavior indicated by the handler, then a fault may be assessed. 


 

• Fringe Response. Dog begins to alert on a lower threshold of odor but is not able to work it to source. 


 

• Aggressive Response. Dog’s exhibiting an aggressive alert will be faulted for each instance. Any alert 
behavior or action that can compromise the integrity of the hides or causes damage to the area of the 
hide or on the object. Examples of aggressive alerts include but are not limited to: any action that includes 
scratching, pawing, pushing objects, digging, biting at the hide or object, excessive licking of the hide or 
object, a dog that leaves bite or scratch marks on any object in the search area, or a dog that damages 
any object in a search that requires the object be replaced. 


 

• Compromising the Search Area. A fault may be assigned if the judge determines the dog, the handler, 
or the reward delivery may have compromised the integrity of the search area. Handlers should be very 
careful not to contaminate the search areas with their rewards, or to touch surfaces and objects in search 
areas. 


 

• Safety, violations, and other infractions. At the judge’s discretion, faults will be given for any of these 
circumstances. Examples might be, but are not limited to, taking the dog off leash in a leash only search 
area, allowing the dog in or under a vehicle during the vehicle search, and/or allowing the dog to be put 
in an unsafe situation. 


 

Section 10. Non-qualifying faults. The following faults will result in a non-qualifying search for all Nosework 
trials and classes: 

 


• Incorrect calls. A non-qualifying fault will be assessed for all incorrect calls. A dog and handler team will 
not be permitted to continue searching if an incorrect call is made for that element. An example of an 
incorrect call would be the owner calling “alert” when the dog enters an “area of interest.” 


 

• Prior to Alert. Dog exposes scent container or distraction before the Alert is called by the handler. 


 

• Eliminating in the Search area or during a search. A dog that fouls the search area or the surrounding 
search area during a search (i.e: a dog cannot foul the area while searching or be excused during the 
search, relieve itself and then come back and continue searching). 


 

• False Alerts. Handler in a Nosework trial calls an “Alert” when there is no odor, but the dog has indicated, 
or when the room has odor, but the dog indicates in the wrong area. 


 

• Miss/Non-indication. In the Master and Elite classes, if a dog fails to alert or exhibit the pre-defined 
trained behavior in the known presence of the target odor on which the dog was trained. If the judge 
determines the dog is unable to exhibit the pre-defined indication or final response to odor when the 
handler calls the alert, then the mis/non-indication could be deemed as a fault or a non-qualifying search 
depending on the extent of the deviation from the ideal. 


 

• Timed Out. If the handler stops the search, or the dog exceeds the assigned element time the search 
will be marked as a NQ on the judge’s books. The dog will not receive any credit for any element where 
they are “timed out.” 


 

• Excused. If the judge stops the search it will be marked as excused. If the dog eliminates during any 
portion of the search, the dog and handler team will be excused and will not be allowed to complete the 
search in that class. A dog that has been excused for eliminating during a search remains eligible to 
compete on the same day if entered in another class or element. A handler may and ask to be excused 
at any time during the search, for any reason. The judge is to grant the request for excusal and mark the 
judge’s book as excused with the reason being handlers request. 


 

• Absent. A dog will be marked absent if the dog and handler are not present when it is their time to run. 
If arrangements have been made due to conflicts and approved by the judge, a dog may be allowed to 
run later. No runs will be allowed if the class has been awarded. An judge does not have to wait for any 
dog. The judge’s decision to mark the dog absent is final. 


 

Section 11. Misbehavior of Handlers. A judge must excuse a handler who exhibits poor sportsmanship. The 
judge’s decision in these matters is final. The dog from the excused handler will not be allowed to continue to 
participate in the trial with a substitute handler. Persons around and/or outside the ring and working area are 
also prohibited from any intentional actions designed to affect the performance of a dog competing in the ring. 
This prohibition shall apply equally to persons attempting to improve or to impair a performance. The Event 
Committee may expel from the trial grounds any person they reasonably believe is attempting or exhibiting 
double handling. Judges may excuse exhibitors whose dogs they reasonably believe are benefiting from “double 
handling”. No person may interfere with the judge in any way while he/she is officiating a class. 

 

By entering in a licensed Nosework event, the exhibitor is inviting the opinion of the judge and must accept the 
judge’s decision as final. Complaints about the judge may only be lodged with the host club if the exhibitor 
believes the judge has violated a specific rule. Complaints about a judge’s knowledge or application of the 
Nosework rules may be filed with the United Kennel Club but must address specific deficiencies. Electronic audio 
or video recordings will not be considered by the United Kennel Club when the exhibitor is disputing a judge’s 
decision. 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 5 

UKC NOSEWORK CLASSES AND SUMMARY OF TITLES 

 

Section 1. UKC Nosework Titles. UKC Nosework titles may be earned only in licensed UKC Nosework events. 
Nosework titles must be earned successively. Equivalent titles from other venues will not be substituted for UKC 
Nosework titles or for determining eligibility for a class but they may be used to determine a dog’s eligibility for 
the A or B sections of the class. 

 The “A” Section. This section is open to all dogs that have not earned a title in the class they are entering 
or an equivalent title in another organization. The exhibitor must own the dog entered or be a member of the 
owner’s household or immediate family. Once the dog has earned the title in that class, they may no longer 
compete in the “A” section of that class but may continue to compete in the “A” section of any other class they 
do not hold a title for. No licensed or professional Nosework/K9 Detection instructor, regardless of the person’s 
status as an amateur or professional, may compete in this section. No person licensed to officiate Nosework in 
UKC or any other organization may compete in this section. 

 The “B” Section. Any dog or handler is eligible to compete in B section of a class. Dog and handler 
teams may continue to compete in this section indefinitely. The exhibitor does not need to own the dog entered. 

 

Section 2. UKC Nosework Title Certificates and Official Notification. Once the requirements for a Nosework 
title have been met and recorded, UKC will automatically mail a Certificate of Honor indicating the award to the 
dog’s recorded owner. The owner shall be deemed notified as of the mailing date of the title certificate. 

 

Section 3. Classes and Titles. UKC licensed Nosework trials need not include all classes, but if a higher class 
is offered, all lower classes must be offered, except for trials offering all four elements in one trial. In that case 
only one class may be offered. The Element titles must be earned from the A or B sections or any combination 
of the two for each of the Element classes. Dogs who do not meet the entry eligibility for the specific Element 
and/or class they are entering may have their wins invalidated. 

 

There are four individual or specific Elements and five “target odors” separated into classes. Each element and 
target odor must be earned consecutively. 

 

The four Elements are: 

o Container 
o Interior 
o Exterior 
o Vehicle 


 

The five target odors and classes are: 

o Novice (Birch Sweet Oil) 
o Advanced (Aniseed Oil) 
o Superior (Clove Oil) 
o Master (Myrrh Oil) 
o Elite (Vetiver Oil) 


 

To earn an Element title a dog must receive two (2) passes at two different UKC licensed Nosework Element 
trials. A pass requires the successful completion of all hides within the class and not more than one (1) fault. 
Element titles may be earned in any order within each class. There is no restriction on the number of passes that 
may be earned under the same judge. 

 

Owners may not enter more than one dog in the same class of a specific element but can enter the same dog 
or a different dog in a different class of the same element at the same trial. (i.e. Jane Doe cannot enter both Rex 
and Fido into a Novice Container class at the same trial, but she can enter Rex into Novice Container class and 
Fido into an Advanced Container class at the same trial or enter Rex into the Novice Container class and Fido 
into the Novice Exterior class.) 


Element Titles. A title certificate will be issued by UKC for each element and class that is passed. These titles 
are as follows: 

 

• Container Titles. Novice (NC), Advance (AC), Superior (SC), Master (MC), Elite (EC) 
• Interior Titles. Novice (NI), Advance (AI), Superior (SI), Master (MI), Elite (EI) 
• Exterior Titles. Novice (NE), Advance (AE), Superior (SE), Master (ME), Elite (EE) 
• Vehicle Titles. Novice (NV), Advance (AV), Superior (SV), Master (MV), Elite (EV) 


 

Section 4. Nosework Titles. Once a dog has earned all four elements (Containers, Interior, Exterior, and 
Vehicles) in each class, they will be granted Nosework titles. These titles must be earned successively. 

• Novice Nosework Title (NN). Once a dog has earned all four elements (Containers, Interior, Exterior, 
and Vehicles) at the Novice level they will be granted a Novice Nosework (NN) title. Dogs may continue 
to compete at the Novice Nosework level indefinitely, but only in the “B” section. 
• Advance Nosework Title (AN). The Novice element title must be earned within that element before the 
dog is eligible to enter the Advanced Element class. Once a dog has earned all four elements (Containers, 
Interior, Exterior, and Vehicles) at the Advanced level they will be granted an Advanced Nosework (AN) 
title. Once a dog has earned an Advance Nosework title, the dog may continue to compete at the Advance 
Nosework level indefinitely, but only in the “B” section. 
• Superior Nosework Title (SN). The Advanced element title must be earned within that element before 
the dog is eligible to enter the Superior Element class. Once a dog has earned all four elements 
(Containers, Interior, Exterior, and Vehicles) at the Superior level they will be granted a Superior 
Nosework (SN) title. Once a dog has earned a Superior Nosework title, the dog may continue to compete 
at the Superior Nosework level indefinitely, but only in the “B” section. 
• Master Nosework Title (MN). The Superior element title must be earned within that element before the 
dog is eligible to enter the Master element class. Once a dog has earned all four elements at the Master 
level, they will be granted a Master Nosework (MN) title. Once a dog has earned a Master Nosework title, 
the dog may continue to compete at the Master Nosework level indefinitely, but only in the “B” section. 
• Elite Nosework Title (EN). The Master element title must be earned within that element before the dog 
is eligible to enter the Elite element class. Once a dog has earned all four elements at the Elite level, they 
will be granted an Elite Nosework (EN) title. Once a dog has earned an Elite Nosework title, the dog may 
continue to compete at the Elite Nosework level indefinitely, but only in the “B” section. 


 

Section 5. Class Champion Titles. Dogs may begin earning legs towards the Class Champion title at any time 
once they have finished the Novice (NN), Advanced (AN), Superior (SN), Master (MN) and/or Elite (EN) 
Nosework titles. The Class Champion title must be earned from the “B” sections. Class Champion titles may be 
earned in any order. 

• Legs towards the Class Champion titles will not begin counting until the next trial following the completion 
of the Nosework title. 


 

Class Champion titles are awarded once three (3) qualifying legs are earned in each element. For example, 
to earn the NNCH title requires 3 qualifying legs in Novice Container, Novice Interior, Novice Exterior and Novice 
Vehicle for a total of 12 qualifying legs 

 

• Novice Champion (NNCH). The Novice Nosework (NN) title must be earned before the dog is eligible to 
earn legs toward the NNCH. To earn the NNCH title, a dog must earn 3 qualifying legs in the Novice B 
section for each element. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at the same 
trial. 
• Advanced Champion (ACH). The Advance Nosework (AN) title must be earned before the dog is eligible 
to earn legs toward the ACH. To earn the ACH title, a dog must earn 3 qualifying legs in the Advanced B 
section for each element. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at the same 
trial. 
• Superior Champion (SCH). The Superior Nosework (SN) title must be earned before the dog is eligible 
to earn legs toward the SCH. To earn the SCH title, a dog must earn 3 qualifying legs in the Superior B 



section for each element. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at the same 
trial. 
• Master Champion (MCH). The Master Nosework (MN) title must be earned before the dog is eligible to 
earn legs toward the MCH. To earn the MCH title, a dog must earn 3 qualifying legs in the Master B 
section for each element. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at the same 
trial. 
• Elite Champion (ECH). The Elite Nosework (EN) title must be earned before the dog is eligible to earn 
legs toward the ECH. To earn the ECH title, a dog must earn 3 qualifying legs in the Elite B section for 
each element. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at the same trial. 
• Nosework Champion (NWCH). Once a dog has earned all five Class Champion titles, the dog will be 
considered a Nosework Champion. 


 

Section 6. Class Grand Champion Titles. Once a dog has completed a Class Champion title, they may start 
earning legs towards the Class Grand Champion Title. The Class Grand Champion title must be earned from 
the “B” sections. The dog does not have to be a Nosework Champion to earn legs toward a Class Grand 
Champion title. Passes towards the Class Grand Champion title will begin counting at the next trial following the 
completion of the Class Champion title. Class Grand Champion titles are awarded once five (5) qualifying legs 
are earned in each element. For example, to earn the NNGC title requires 5 qualifying legs in Novice Container, 
Novice Interior, Novice Exterior and Novice Vehicle for a total of 20 qualifying legs. 

• Novice Grand Champion (NGC). A dog must have earned the NCH title before being eligible to earn legs 
towards the NGC title. To earn the NGC title a dog must earn 5 qualifying legs in the B section for each 
element at the Novice level. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at the same 
trial. 
• Advance Grand Champion (AGC). A dog must have earned the ACH title before being eligible to earn 
legs towards the AGC title. To earn the AGC title a dog must earn 5 qualifying legs in the B section for 
each element at the Advance level. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at the 
same trial. 
• Superior Grand Champion (SNGC). A dog must have earned the SCH title before being eligible to earn 
legs towards the SNGC title. To earn the SNGC title a dog must earn 5 qualifying legs in the B section 
for each element at the Superior level. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at 
the same trial. 
• Master Grand Champion (MGC). A dog must have earned the MCH title before being eligible to earn legs 
towards the MGC title. To earn the MGC title a dog must earn 5 qualifying legs in the B section for each 
element at the Master level. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at the same 
trial. 
• Elite Grand Champion (EGC). A dog must have earned the ECH title before being eligible to earn legs 
towards the EGC title. To earn the EGC title a dog must earn 5 qualifying legs in the B section for each 
element at the Elite level. The qualifying legs for each element do not have to be earned at the same 
trial. 
• Nosework Grand Champion (NWGC). Once a dog has earned all five element Grand Champion titles, 
the dog will be considered a Nosework Grand Champion. 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 6 

NOVICE ELEMENT TITLE REQUIREMENTS 

 

Section 1. General Rules. Novice Element titles are achieved in each element individually after receiving two legs 
for each element. Titles available in this level are Containers (NC), Exterior (NE), Interior (NI), and Vehicle (NV). 
Elements do not have to be earned in any order. If all four elements are attained at this level, the dog will be granted 
a NN title. There will be only one hide in each Novice Element class. No distractions are allowed at this level. 

 

Section 2. Target Odor & Hides. Only one odor, Birch will be used in the Novice Element classes. No hides 
may be higher than two (2) feet. 

 

Section 3. Alerts. Handlers will be responsible for calling the alert. A formal and final response is not required at this level. 
It is not required that the dog show a specific behavior, however, a change in behavior should be recognizable to the judge 
and communicate a decision has been made on the part of the dog. The handler must call an alert when they recognize 
the dogs change in behavior indicating the dog has found the odor. After calling the Alert, the handler may not cue/re-cue 
the dog to search if asked “where.” After the judge has confirmed the alert, the handler may reward the dog. In this class 
only, handlers will be allowed one incorrect call of the alert. If an incorrect call is made by the handler, time will 
not stop. The handler will be informed of the error by the judge and will be allowed to continue to search within 
the allowable time for the class. The incorrect call will be scored as a fault. The second incorrect call will result in 
a non-qualifying search. 

 

An Alert behavior does not need to be on the entry form in this class. 

 

Section 4. Novice Elements 

a.) Novice Containers – (NC) A Novice Container title will be granted after two passing legs in the Container 
element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with containers that will consist of 12 cardboard boxes set in a straight line down 
the middle of the designated search, and on the floor or ground. 

b.) Novice Exterior – (NE). A Novice Exterior title will be granted after two passing legs in the Exterior 
element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done in an exterior area, outdoors and will be one area a minimum of 200 square feet and a 
maximum of 400 square feet. The area to be searched will be identified during the Handlers Briefing. Walking 
around the outside of the area will be allowed. The judge or steward will be available for questions. This area 
may be marked off as the designated search area with caution tape, ring gates, etc. 

c.) Novice Interior – (NI). A Novice Interior title will be granted after two passing legs in the Interior element 
are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done in an interior area, indoors and will be one area a minimum of 100 square feet 
and a maximum of 150 square feet. This area may be within a larger area and marked off as the 
designated search area with caution tape, ring gates, etc. 

d.) Novice Vehicle – (NV). A Novice Vehicle title will be granted after two passing legs in the Vehicle element 
are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with three vehicles (automobiles) all facing the same direction and set in a line. 
The vehicles must be no less than four (4) feet and no more than six (6) feet apart with one hidden odor 
on one of the vehicles. The front bumper must be utilized for the hide. 

 

Section 5. Scoring, Faults and Element Time. Each leg is based on a pass or fail basis with no more than one (1) fault. 
A passing search is given when the handler correctly calls the alerts when the dog finds the hides where applicable in each 
search area within the allotted time. Maximum times for each element must not be exceeded and are determined by the 
specific competition. The maximum time allowance for the Novice Element classes is three (3) minutes. Each search 
requires that the handler state “alert”. The dog must locate the correct hide and the handler must call the alert within the 
allotted time to receive a passing search. A fault will affect placements in the competition. Placements are ranked by faults 
and then time. A team without a fault will place above a team with a fault regardless of their running time. 

Non-Qualifying. 

o If the search goes over the maximum time allowed for the search. 







o If the handler stops the search. 
o If more than one fault has been assessed. 
o If the handler calls an incorrect alert the second time. 
o In a container search, if the handler intentionally kicks a box out of the line of containers. 
o Dog exposes scent container before the Alert is called by the handler. 






Faults. Only one fault is allowed per search. Descriptions of faults for infractions and incorrect calls are 
outlined elsewhere in the rulebook. 

o A fault will be assessed for each handling error. 
o First incorrect call of an alert. 
o Giving the dog any additional command and/or gesture after the “Alert” call if asked “Where?”. 
o Aggressive alerts will be assessed a fault for each incident. 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 7 

ADVANCED ELEMENT TITLE REQUIREMENTS 

 

Section 1. General Rules. Advanced Element titles are achieved in each element individually after receiving 
two legs for each element. Titles available in this level are Containers (AC), Exterior (AE), Interior (AI), and 
Vehicle (AV). Elements do not have to be earned in any order. If all four elements are attained at this level, the 
dog will be granted an AN title. There will be only one hide in each Advanced Element class. One distraction is 
required at this level. 

 

Section 2. Target Odor & Hides. Only one odor, Anise will be used in the Advanced Element classes. No hides 
may be higher than two (2) feet. 

 

Section 3. Alerts. Handlers will be responsible for calling the alert. A formal and final response is not required at this 
level. It is not required that the dog show a specific behavior, however, a change in behavior must be recognizable to 
the judge and communicate a decision has been made on the part of the dog. The handler must call an alert when 
they recognize the dogs change in behavior indicating the dog has found the odor. After calling the Alert, the handler may 
not cue/re-cue the dog to search if asked “where.” After the judge has confirmed the alert, the handler may reward the dog. 
An Alert behavior does not need to be on the entry form in this class. 

 

Section 4. Distractions. One distraction is required in this class. Any type of toy as described in Chapter 2, Section 
4 is considered a distraction. Distractions are described within their specific elements. 

 

Section 5. Advanced Elements 

a.) Advanced Containers - (AC) An Advanced Container title will be granted after two passing legs in the 
Container element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with containers that will consist of 12 cardboard boxes set in a straight line down 
the middle of the designated search area, and on the floor or ground. 

b.) Advanced Exterior – (AE). An Advanced Exterior title will be granted after two passing legs in the 
Exterior element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done in an exterior area, outdoors and will be one area a minimum of 500 square feet 
and a maximum of 750 square feet. The area to be searched will be identified during the Handlers 
Briefing. Walking around the outside of the area will be allowed. The judge or steward will be available 
for questions. This area may be marked off as the designated search area with caution tape, ring gates, 
etc. 

c.) Advanced Interior – (AI). An Advanced Interior title will be granted after two passing legs in the Interior 
element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done in an interior area, indoors and will be one area a minimum of 150 square feet 
and a maximum of 300 square feet. This area may be within a larger area and marked off as the 
designated search area with caution tape, ring gates, etc. 

d.) Advanced Vehicle – (AV). An Advanced Vehicle title will be granted after two passing legs in the Vehicle 
element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with three vehicles (automobiles) all facing the same direction and set in a line. 
The vehicles must be no less than four (4) feet and no more than six (6) feet apart with one hidden odor 
on one vehicle. Any area on the vehicles may be utilized for the hide. 

 

Section 5. Scoring, Faults and Element Time. Each leg is based on a pass or fail basis with no more than one 
(1) fault. A passing search is given when the handler correctly calls the alerts when the dog finds the hides where 
applicable in each search area within the allotted time. Maximum times for each element must not be exceeded 
and are determined by the specific competition. The maximum time allowance for the Advanced Element classes 
is four (4) minutes. Each search requires that the handler call “alert”. The dog must locate the correct hide and 
the handler must call the alert within the allotted amount of time to receive a passing score. 

 

 

 


Non-Qualifying. 

o If the search goes over the maximum time allowed for the search. 
o If the handler stops the search. 
o If more than one fault has been assessed. 
o If the handler calls an alert at incorrect source. 
o In a container search, if the handler intentionally kicks a box out of the line of containers. 
o Dog exposes scent container or distraction before the Alert is called by the handler. 






Faults. Only one fault is allowed per search. Descriptions of faults for infractions and incorrect calls are 
outlined elsewhere in the rulebook. 

o A fault will be assessed for each handling error. 
o Giving the dog any additional command and/or gesture after the “Alert” call if asked “Where?” 
o Aggressive alerts will be assessed a fault for each incident. 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 8 

SUPERIOR ELEMENT TITLE REQUIREMENTS 

 

Section 1. General Rules. Superior Element titles are achieved in each element individually after receiving two 
legs for each element. Titles available in this class are Containers (SC), Exterior (SE), Interior (SI), and Vehicle 
(SV). Elements do not have to be earned in any order. If all four elements are attained at this level, the dog will 
be granted an SN title. There will be two hides in each Superior Element class. One distraction is required in the 
class. 

 

Section 2. Target Odor & Hides. Two odors will be used for the Superior element class. Clove is a required 
odor for this class. The other eligible odors are Birch and Anise. Each search will contain a Clove hide and a 
hide that consists of either Birch or Anise. Odors must be used separately to make up the two hides, they 
cannot be combined in the same hide and they cannot be adjacent to one another. No hides may be higher 
than three (3) feet. 

 

Section 3. Alerts. Handlers will be responsible for calling the alert. A formal and final response is not required at this 
level. It is not required that the dog show a specific behavior, however, a change in behavior must be recognizable to 
the judge and communicate a decision has been made on the part of the dog. The handler must call an alert when 
they recognize the dogs change in behavior indicating the dog has found the odor. After calling the Alert, the handler may 
not cue/re-cue the dog to continue searching until the judge has confirmed the call. After the judge has confirmed the alert, 
the handler may reward the dog and/or directly continue the search for the second hide. An Alert behavior does not need 
to be on the entry form in this class, however the handler must be able to articulate three possible behaviors or chains of 
behaviors if asked by the judge prior to searching. 

 

Section 4. Distractions. One distraction is required in this class. Any type of food or toy as described in Chapter 
2, Section 4 is considered a distraction. Distractions are described within their specific elements. 

 

Section 5. Superior Elements 

a.) Superior Containers – (SC) A Superior Container title will be granted after two passing legs in the 
Container element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with containers that will consist of 16 cardboard boxes set in no more than 2 
rows and evenly spaced, in the designated search area, and on the floor or ground. The distraction must 
not be immediately next to a hide. 

b.) Superior Exterior – (SE). A Superior Exterior title will be granted after two passing legs in the Exterior 
element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done in an exterior area, outdoors and will be one area a minimum of 1000 square 
feet and a maximum of 1500 square feet. The distraction must not be immediately next to the hide. The 
area to be searched will be identified during the Handlers Briefing. Walking around the outside of the 
area will be allowed. The judge or steward will be available for questions. This area may be marked off 
as the designated search area with caution tape, ring gates, etc. 

c.) Superior Interior – (SI). A Superior Interior title will be granted after two passing legs in the Interior 
element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


Search area indoors will consist of two areas. One distraction is required at this level. The distraction can 
be in either area but may only be combined with one hide or in a blank area. There can either be two 
hides in one room and a distraction in the blank area, or one hide in each room with the distraction in one 
of those areas, but not immediately next to the hide. One area must be a minimum 100 sq. feet with a 
maximum of 200 sq. feet. The second area will be a minimum of 300 sq. feet and a maximum of 400 sq. 
feet. These areas may be within a larger area and marked off as the designated search area with caution 
tape, ring gates, etc. Areas may consist of bathrooms, separate rooms, or rooms marked off as 
designated above. Handlers may move back and forth between rooms. The Element timer will remain 
running when changing rooms. 

d.) Superior Vehicle – (SV). A Superior Vehicle title will be granted after two passing legs in the Vehicle 
element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with four vehicles. Three of the vehicles must be automobiles. The fourth vehicle 


may be something other than an automobile but must meet the specifications outlined in this rulebook. 
Vehicles must be set in a line with no specific orientation. All vehicles must be set no less than four (4) 
feet and no more than six (6) feet apart. Each hide must be placed on a separate vehicle independent of 
the other, with no two hides on the same vehicle. Any area may be utilized on the vehicles, but no hides 
may be higher than three (3) feet. The distraction cannot be on the same vehicle as the hide but can be 
on the vehicle next to the hide. 

 

Section 6. Scoring, Faults and Element Time. Each leg is based on a pass or fail basis with no more than one 
(1) fault. A passing search is given when the handler correctly calls the alerts when the dog finds the hides where 
applicable in each search area within the allotted time. Maximum times for each element must not be exceeded 
and are determined by the specific competition. The maximum time allowance for the Superior Element classes 
is five (5) minutes. Each search requires that the handler call “Alert” for each hide that is found. The Element 
time will start when any part of the dog or handler cross the start line and will stop when the handler calls the 
final alert or when the allotted search time is passed. The Search timer will start with the Element time and will 
start and stop the timing for each of the two searches. When the handler calls alert, the search timer stops. If the 
handler is correct, timing will re-start as soon as the handler gives a command and/or signals to begin searching 
or when the team makes a commitment to begin searching. The search times from each hide will be recorded 
as the dog’s actual search time. The search time stopwatch does not have to cleared between searches, it can 
simply be stopped and restarted. This is the time that is recorded in the judge’s book as the actual search time. 
No dog and handler team may exceed the maximum element time as posted at the trial. 

 

Non-Qualifying. 

o If the search goes over the maximum time allowed for the search. 
o If the handler stops the search. 
o If more than one fault has been assessed. 
o If the handler calls an alert at incorrect source. 
o The dog does not find all the hides. 
o The dog plays with or picks up the distraction. 
o Dog exposes scent container or distraction before the Alert is called by the handler. 
o In a container search, if the handler intentionally kicks a box out of the line of containers. 






Faults. Only one fault is allowed per search. Descriptions of faults for infractions and incorrect calls are 
outlined elsewhere in the rulebook. 

o A fault will be assessed for each handling error. 
o Giving the dog any additional command and/or gesture after the “Alert” call if asked “Where?” 
o Aggressive alerts will be assessed a fault for each incident. 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 9 

MASTER ELEMENT TITLE REQUIREMENTS 

 

Section 1. General Rules. Master Element titles are achieved in each element individually after receiving two 
legs for each element. Titles available in this level are Containers (MC), Exterior (ME), Interior (MI), and Vehicle 
(MV). Elements do not have to be earned in any order. If all four elements are attained at this level, the dog will 
be granted a MN title. There must be three hides in each Master Element class. 

 

Section 2. Target Odor & Hides. Three odors will be used in the Master Element class. Myrrh is a required 
odor for this level. The other eligible odors that may be used are: Birch, Anise, and Clove. Odors must be used 
separately to make up the three hides. No hide can consist of more than one odor. No hides may be higher than 
four (4) feet. 

 

Section 3. Alerts. The alert behavior must be stated on the entry form and score sheet prior to the start of the 
element. It is acceptable to list up to three possible and specific behaviors (or chain of behaviors) that must be 
clearly recognized and concise. The judge may ask for clarification from the handler on the response prior to the 
beginning of the element. Dogs must locate all hides and handlers will be responsible for calling all alerts. 

 

At this level, when alerts are called, the dog must be exhibiting at least one of the pre-defined indications or final 
responses to the odor. If the dog is not exhibiting at least one of the behaviors, or the judge determines the dog 
is unable to exhibit the pre-defined indication or final response to odor, when the handler calls alert, then it could 
be deemed as a fault or a non-qualifying search depending on the extent of the deviation from the ideal. 

 

After calling the alert, the handler may not cue/re-cue the dog to continue searching until the judge has confirmed 
the call. After the judge has confirmed the alert, the handler may reward the dog and/or directly continue the 
search in the case of multiple hides. 

(Examples of behaviors - sits; downs; stands; sits or downs; nose point then looks at handler; freezes at sources; 
nose to source, freezes, looks at hander, etc.). 

 

Section 4. Distractions & Hides. One distraction is required at this level in each element. Any type of food or 
toy that is hidden or any type of object that mimics a realistic animal or person that is not hidden is 
considered a distraction. Distractions as described in Chapter 2, Section 4 are described within the specific 
elements for each class. 

 

Section 5. Master Elements 

a.) Master Containers – (MC) A Master Container title will be granted after two passing legs in the Container 
element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with containers that will consist of 20 cardboard boxes set in a designated area and in 
any arrangement on the floor or ground. Each hide must be placed in a separate container. Boxes containing 
target odors and/or distractions may be placed adjacent to each other. 

b.) Master Exterior – (ME) A Master Nosework Exterior title will be granted after two passing legs in the 
Exterior element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done in an exterior area, outdoors and will be one area a minimum of 2000 sq. feet 
and a maximum of 3000 sq. feet. The area to be searched will be identified during the Handlers Briefing. 
During the briefing, walking around outside the designated area will be allowed. The judge or steward 
will be available for questions. This area may be marked off as the designated search area with caution 
tape, ring gates, etc. Odors must be used separately to make up the hides; odors cannot be combined 
on the same item. No hide may be higher than four (4) feet. Distractions and/or target odors may be 
placed adjacent to each other. 

c.) Master Interior – (MI) A Master Interior title will be granted after two passing legs in the Interior element 
are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


Search area indoors will consist of two areas. One area can be as small as 100 sq. feet or as large as 
200 sq. feet. The second area will be a minimum of 300 sq. feet and a maximum of 400 sq. feet. These 
areas may be within a larger area and marked off as the designated search area with caution tape, ring 


gates, etc. Areas may consist of bathrooms, separate rooms, or rooms marked off as designated above. 
Odors must be used separately to make up the hides; odors cannot be combined at the same place. No 
hides may be higher than four (4) feet. Distractions and/or target odors may be place adjacent to each 
other. 

Hides will be as follows: 

1. All hides in one area with no distraction in that area, and one distraction in a blank area (an area 
without a hide), or 
2. All hides and one distraction in one area with no hides or distraction in a blank area (an area 
without a hide), or 
3. One or two hides and one distraction in one area, and the additional hide(s) in the other area. 
d.) Master Vehicle – (MV) A Master Vehicle title will be granted after two passing legs in the Vehicle element 
are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with five vehicles. Two vehicles may be other than an automobile but must meet 
the specifications in this rulebook. Vehicles must be set in a scattered pattern and may face any direction 
with no specific orientation. All vehicles must be set no less than four (4) feet and no more than six (6) 
feet apart. Any area may be utilized on the vehicles, but only one hide may be on a vehicle. 

Master level hides on any regular vehicle (Example: personal passenger vehicles such as cars, vans, 
trucks) will be no more than three (3) feet. For all those designated as “other than vehicle,” the normal 
four (4) foot Master level height can be used. (Examples: tractors, trailers, golf carts, etc.). The distraction 
may be placed on the same vehicle as the hide but cannot be on the same side as the hide. The 
distraction may also be placed on a vehicle next to the vehicle with the hide. 

 

Section 6. Scoring, Faults and Element Time. Each leg is based on a pass or fail basis and no more than one 
(1) fault. A passing search is given when the handler correctly calls the alerts when the dog finds the hides where 
applicable in each search area within the allotted time. Maximum times for each element must not be exceeded 
and are determined by the specific competition. The maximum time allowance for the Master Element classes 
is six (6) minutes. Each search requires that the handler calls “alert” for each hide that is found. The Element 
time will start when any part of the dog or handler cross the start line and will stop when the handler calls the 
final alert or when the allotted search time is passed. The Search timer will start with the Element time and will 
start and stop the timing for each of the two searches. When the handler calls alert, the search timer stops. If the 
handler is correct, timing will re-start as soon as the handler gives a command and/or signals to begin searching 
or when the team makes a commitment to begin searching. The search times from each hide will be recorded 
as the dog’s actual search time. The search time stopwatch does not have to cleared between searches, it can 
simply be stopped and re-started. This is the time that is recorded in the judge’s book as the actual search time. 
No dog and handler team may exceed the maximum element time as posted at the trial. 

 

Non-Qualifying. 

o If the search goes over the maximum time allowed for the search. 
o If the handler stops the search. 
o If more than one fault has been assessed. 
o If the handler calls an alert at incorrect source. 
o The dog does not find all the hides. 
o The dog plays with or picks up the distraction. 
o Dog exposes scent container or distraction before the Alert is called by the handler. 
o The dog alerts at the correct odor source but does not display the stated or pre-defined alert if the 
judge has not determined the dog, for some reason, was unable to exhibit the pre-defined indication 
or final response to odor. 
o In a container search, if the handler intentionally kicks a box out of the line of containers. 






Faults. Only one fault is allowed per search. Descriptions of faults for infractions and incorrect calls are 
outlined elsewhere in the rulebook. 

o A fault will be assessed for each handling error. 
o Giving the dog any additional command and/or gesture after the “Alert” call if asked “Where?” 
o Aggressive alerts will be assessed a fault for each incident. 




 

 


CHAPTER 10 

ELITE ELEMENT TITLE REQUIREMENTS 

 

Section 1. General Rules. Elite Element titles are achieved in each element individually after receiving two legs 
for each element. Titles available in this level are Containers (EC), Exterior (EE), Interior (EI), and Vehicle (EV). 
Elements do not have to be earned in any order. If all four elements are attained at this level, the dog will be 
granted an EN title. There will be one to four hides in each Elite Element class. 

 

Section 2. Target Odor & Hides. All five odors may be used in the Elite Element classes. Vetiver is a required 
odor for this level. The other odors that may be used are: Birch, Anise, Clove, and Myrrh. Odors must be used 
separately to make up the one, two, three or four hides. Handlers will not be informed of the number of hides in 
any Elite class. No hide can consist of more than one odor. No hides may be higher than five (5) feet. 

 

Section 3. Alerts. The Alert must be stated on the entry form and score sheet prior to the start of the element. 
The judge may ask for clarification from the handler on the response prior to the beginning of the element. Alerts 
at this level may be no more than two (2) behaviors (or chain of behaviors) that must be clearly recognized and 
concise. Dogs must locate all hides and handlers will be responsible for calling all alerts. Each search requires 
that the handler state “alert” and/or “finish.” An “alert” call is required for each hide that is found, and a “finish” 
call is required when the handler believes all hides have been found. 

 

At this level, when alerts are called, the dog must be exhibiting at least one of the pre-defined indications or final 
responses to the odor. If the dog is not exhibiting at least one of the behaviors, or the judge determines the dog 
is unable to exhibit the pre-defined indication or final response to odor, when the handler calls alert, then it could 
be deemed as a fault or a non-qualifying search depending on the extent of the deviation from the ideal. 

 

After calling the alert, the handler may not cue/re-cue the dog to continue searching until the judge has confirmed 
the call. After the judge has confirmed the alert, the handler may reward the dog and/or directly continue the 
search in the case of multiple hides. 

 

(Examples of behaviors - sits; downs; stands; sits or downs; nose point then looks at handler; freezes at sources 
then looks at hander, etc.). 

 

Section 4. Distractions & Hides. Two distractions are required at this level in each element. Any type of food, 
toy, mimic object/statues or humans are considered a distraction as described in Chapter 2, Section 4 
Distractions are described within the specific elements for each class. 

 

Section 5. Elite Elements 

a.) Elite Containers – (EC) An Elite Container title will be granted after two passing legs in the Container 
element are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with containers that will consist of 24 cardboard boxes set in the designated 
search area, and in any arrangement on the floor or ground. Only one odor can be in any container. 
Distractions must be placed in one of the containers not being used with the target odor. Boxes 
containing target odors and/or distractions may be placed adjacent to each other. 

b.) Elite Exterior – (EE). An Elite Exterior title will be granted after two passing legs in the Exterior element 
are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done in one exterior area, outdoors and will be a minimum of 3000 sq. feet and a 
maximum of 4000 sq. feet. Distractions and/or target odors may be placed adjacent to each other. 
The area to be searched will be identified during the Handlers Briefing. During the briefing, walking around 
outside the designated area will be allowed. The judge or steward will be available for questions. This 
area may be marked off as the designated search area with caution tape, ring gates, etc. 

c.) Elite Interior – (EI). An Elite Interior title will be granted after two passing legs in the Interior element are 
achieved. Each search requires that the handler state “alert,” or “finish”. Each leg consists of the following: 


Search area indoors will consist of three areas. One area can be as small as 100 sq. feet or as large as 
200 sq. feet. The second area will be a minimum of 300 sq. feet and a maximum of 400 sq. feet. The 


third area will be a minimum of 400 sq. feet and a maximum of 600 sq. feet. These areas may be within 
a larger area and marked off as the designated search area with caution tape, ring gates, etc. Areas may 
consist of bathrooms, separate rooms, or rooms marked off as designated above. Odors must be used 
separately and cannot be combined at the same place. Distractions and/or target odors may be 
placed adjacent to each other. Hides will be as follows: 

1. The smaller space can contain no more than two items (hides and/or distractions) in each space. 
2. The larger two spaces may contain no more than three items (hides and/or distractions) in each 
space. 
3. Any of the three areas may be blank. 
d.) Elite Vehicle – (EV). An Elite Vehicle title will be granted after two passing legs in the Vehicle element 
are achieved. Each leg consists of the following: 


The search will be done with six vehicles. Two vehicles may be other than an automobile but must meet 
the specifications outlined in this rulebook. Vehicles must be set in a scattered pattern and may face any 
direction with no specific orientation. All vehicles must be set no less than four (4) feet and no more than 
six (6) feet apart. Any area may be utilized on the vehicles, Elite level hides on any regular vehicle (i.e. 
personal passenger vehicles such as cars, vans, trucks) will be no more than three (3) feet. For all those 
designated as “other than vehicle,” the normal five (5) foot Elite level height can be used. (i.e. tractors, 
trailers, golf carts, etc.). Only one hide may be on any vehicle. One distraction may be placed on the 
same vehicle as the hide but cannot be on the same side as the hide. A distraction or a hide may also 
be placed on a vehicle next to another vehicle with a hide. 

 

Section 6. Scoring, Faults and Running Time. Each leg is based on a pass or fail basis and no more than one 
(1) fault. A passing search is given when the handler correctly calls the alerts when the dog finds the hides where 
applicable in each search area within the allotted time. Maximum times for each element must not be exceeded 
and are determined by the specific competition. The maximum time allowance for the Elite Element classes is 
six (6) minutes. Each search requires that the handler calls “alert” for each hide that is found and “finish” when 
the handler believes no other hides remain in the search areas. The actual Element time will start when any part 
of the dog or handler cross the start line and will stop when the handler calls the final “alert,” when the handler 
calls “finish,” or when the allotted time has passed. The Search timer will start with the Element timer and will 
stop and restart the timing for each of the one, two, three, or four searches. When the handler calls the first alert, 
the search timer stops. If the handler is correct, timing will restart as soon as the handler gives a command 
and/or signal to begin searching or when the team makes a commitment to begin searching. The search times 
for each hide will be recorded as the dog’s actual search time. The search time stopwatch does not have to be 
cleared between runs, it can simply be stopped and restarted. This is the time that is recorded in the judge’s 
book as the actual search time. No dog and handler team may exceed the maximum element time as posted at 
the trial. 

 

Non-Qualifying. 

o If the search goes over the maximum time allowed for the search. 
o If the handler stops the search. 
o If more than one fault has been assessed. 
o If the handler calls an alert at incorrect source. 
o The dog does not find all the hides. 
o The dog plays with or picks up the distraction. 
o Dog exposes scent container or distraction before the Alert is called by the handler. 
o The dog alerts at the correct odor source but does not display the stated or pre-defined alert if the 
judge has not determined the do, for some reason was unable to exhibit the pre-defined indication 
or final response to odor. 
o In a container search, if the handler intentionally kicks a box out of the line of containers. 






Faults. Only one fault is allowed per search. Descriptions of faults for infractions and incorrect calls are 
outlined elsewhere in the rulebook. 

o A fault will be assessed for each handling error. 
o Giving the dog any additional command and/or gesture after the “Alert” call if asked “Where?” 
o Aggressive alerts will be assessed a fault for each incident. 





CHAPTER 11 

HANDLER DISCRIMINATION CLASSES TITLES AND 
REQUIREMENTS 

 

Section 1. General Rules. The primary purpose of Handler Discrimination is to demonstrate the dog’s ability to 
find the handler’s scented article in a specific container. Depending upon the level, the article may be in a closed 
or open container. Handler Discrimination titles are achieved after receiving three legs in each level. Titles 
available are: Novice Handler Discrimination (NHD), Advanced Handler Discrimination (AHD), Excellent Handler 
Discrimination (EHD) and Master Handler Discrimination (MHD). Dogs must always remain on leash for the 
Novice, Advance and Excellent Handler Discrimination (HD) classes. 

 

Section 2. Nosework Handler Discrimination Titles. This Handler Discrimination titles must be earned from 
the A or B sections or any combination of the two for each of the Handler Discrimination classes. There are four 
Handler Discrimination classes and each class must be earned successively. The four classes are: 

• Novice (NHD). To earn this title, a dog must earn three qualifying passes at three different UKC licensed 
Nosework trials. A qualifying pass requires the successful completion of the search and not more than 
one (1) fault. There is no restriction on the number of qualifying passes that may be earned under the 
same judge. 
• Advanced (AHD). To earn this title, a dog must earn three qualifying passes at three different UKC 
licensed Nosework trials. A qualifying pass requires the successful completion of the search and not 
more than one (1) fault. There is no restriction on the number of qualifying passes that may be earned 
under the same judge. 
• Excellent (EHD). To earn this title, a dog must earn three qualifying passes at three different UKC 
licensed Nosework trials. A qualifying pass requires the successful completion of the search and not 
more than one (1) fault. There is no restriction on the number of qualifying passes that may be earned 
under the same judge. 
• Master (MHD). To earn this title, a dog must earn three qualifying passes at three different UKC licensed 
Nosework trials. A qualifying pass requires the successful completion of finding and alerting at the correct 
location of the hide, and not more than one (1) fault. There is no restriction on the number of qualifying 
passes that may be earned under the same judge. 


 

Section 3. Handler Discrimination Titles of Distinction. Once a dog has earned the Excellent Handler 
Discrimination title (EHD) or the Master Handler Discrimination Title (MHD), legs towards the Excellent or Master 
HD Excellent titles, Champion titles or Grand Champion titles may be earned as outlined below. 

• Excellent Handler Discrimination Supreme title. Any dog that has earned the Excellent Handler 
Discrimination title (EHD) may earn legs toward the Excellent Handler Discrimination Supreme (EHDS) 
title beginning at the next Handler Discrimination trial following the completion of the requirements of the 
EHD title. To earn an Excellent Handler Discrimination Supreme title, a dog must earn 10 qualifying 
searches from the “B” section of the Handler Discrimination Excellent class. There shall be no restriction 
on the number of judges required to earn this title. The EHDS title will have numeric designations to 
signify the number of times the title has been completed, for example EHDS2, EHDS3, etc. 
• Master Handler Discrimination Excellent title. Any dog that has earned the Master Handler 
Discrimination title (MHD) may earn legs toward the Master Handler Discrimination Excellent (MHDX) 
title beginning at the next Handler Discrimination trial following the completion of the requirements of the 
MHD title. To earn a Master Handler Discrimination Excellent title, a dog must earn 10 qualifying searches 
from the “B” section of the Handler Discrimination Master class. There shall be no restriction on the 
number of judges required to earn this title. The MHDX title will have numeric designations to signify the 
number of times the title has been completed, for example MHDX2, MHDX3, etc. 
• Handler Discrimination Champion Title (HDCH). Any dog that has earned the Master Handler 
Discrimination (MHD) title may start earning legs toward the Handler Discrimination Champion (HDCH) 
title. To earn the Handler Discrimination Champion title, a dog must earn: 



o Combined Wins. At 10 different UKC Licensed Handler Discrimination trials earn 10 qualifying 
searches in each of the Handler Discrimination Excellent B and Master B classes in the same 
trial. 



• Handler Discrimination Grand Champion Title (HDGC). Any dog that has earned the Handler 
Discrimination Champion (HDCH) title may start earning legs toward the Handler Discrimination Grand 
Champion (HDGC) title. To earn the Handler Discrimination Grand Champion title, a dog must earn; 
o Combined Wins. At 15 different UKC Licensed Handler Discrimination trials earn 15 qualifying 
searches in each of the Handler Discrimination Excellent B and Master B classes in the same 
trial. 





 

Section 4. Handler Discrimination Alerts. Handlers will be responsible for calling the alert. A formal and final 
response is not required for Novice, Advanced, or Excellent, however, a change in behavior must be recognizable 
to the judge and communicate a decision has been made on the part of the dog. An Alert behavior does not 
need to be on the entry form for these classes. 

 

Master Handler Discrimination Alerts. The alert must be stated on the entry form and score sheet. Handers will 
be responsible for calling the alert. The dog must alert to the handler’s article with either a “sit” or a “down,” as 
required for this class level. 

 

Section 5. Faults. A handler/dog team may receive no more than one (1) fault and still receive a passing leg. 
Faults may be assessed assigned as described in Chapter 4 – Judging Procedures. Additional faults may apply 
as outlined in the specific class. 

 

Section 6. Novice Handler Discrimination: (NHD). The search will be done with boxes set in a straight line 
down the middle of the designated search area, and on the floor or ground. There will be 12 boxes set up in the 
ring prior to the handler entering the search area. Boxes must be uniform in size and be at least 24 inches apart 
from one another. No intentional distractions are allowed at this level. There will be only one glove in this class. 

 

The handler is to present one clean glove to the judge at a designated time. The glove can be previously scented 
by the owner. The handler will arrive at the ring with one scented glove and will turn away from the line of boxes 
at the designated place. The judge will collect the glove by having the handler drop it in a box. The judge will 
close the box and with the handler still facing away, the judge or steward will place the box in the line with the 
other containers. The steward will collect the empty box and place it at the table until the search is finished. The 
same position in line will be used for all target hides, to ensure equal search distance to the target odor and 
fairness for placements. 

 

The judge will then order the handler to “Search” and the handler may reach down and allow the dog to sniff 
their hand prior to turning and searching. The handler and dog must then turn and begin the search. A formal 
and final response is not required at this level. The handler must call the alert when they recognized the dog has 
found their scent. If correctly identified, a pass will be awarded. Handlers in Handler Discrimination may re-cue 
their dog during the search by allowing the dog to sniff their hand, and only their hand, once the search has 
begun. Handlers may not carry additional scented items with them for the dog to be re-cued. 

 

When the search is finished, the steward will collect the box that contained the handler’s glove and replace it 
with an empty unscented box so that any approaching handler will always see 12 boxes in the ring. One box will 
be needed for each exhibitor in addition to the required number of boxes for this class. Additional boxes should 
be available for replacement. The same position in line will be used for all target hides, to ensure equal search 
distance to target odor and fairness for placements. 

 

Section 7. Advanced Handler Discrimination: (AHD). The search will be done with boxes set in a straight line 
down the middle of the designated search area, and on the floor or ground. There will be 12 boxes set up in the 
ring prior to the handler entering the search area. Boxes must be uniform in size and be at least 24 inches apart 
from one another. No intentional distractions are allowed at this level. There will be one glove that has been 
scented by the handler and 11 gloves that have been scented by the judge to make up a total of 12 gloves in 12 
boxes. 


 

The handler is to present one scented glove to the judge at a designated time. The handler will arrive at the ring 
with one scented glove and will turn away from the line of boxes at the designated place. With the handler turned 
away, the steward will remove the empty box from the line-up and place it at the table until the search is finished. 
The judge will collect the glove from the handler by having the handler drop it in the box. The judge will close the 
box and with the handler still facing away, the judge or steward will place the box in the empty space and in line 
with the other containers. The same position in line will be used for all target hides to ensure equal search 
distance to target odor and fairness for placement. 

 

The judge will then order the handler to “Search” and the handler may reach down and allow the dog to sniff 
their hand prior to turning and searching. The handler and dog must then turn and begin the search. Handlers 
will be responsible for calling the alert. If the alert is correctly identified, a pass will be awarded. If a handler calls 
an Alert that is incorrect searching will end. Handlers in Hander Discrimination may re-cue their dog during the 
search by allowing the dog to sniff their hand, and only their hand, once the search has begun. Handlers may 
not carry additional scented items with them for the dog to be re-cued. 

 

When the search is finished, the steward will collect the box that contained the handler’s glove and replace it 
with an empty unscented box so that any approaching handler will always see 12 boxes in the ring. One box will 
be needed for each exhibitor in addition to the required number of boxes for this class. Additional boxes should 
be available for replacement. The same position in line will be used for all target hides, to ensure equal search 
distance to target odor and fairness for placements. 

 

Section 8. Excellent level: (EHD) Handlers will compete in groups of 12. No sooner than 15 minutes prior to 
the beginning of their section, all handlers in the group that are competing will bring their pre-scented glove 
to the ring inside a sealed plastic bag with their armband number legibly written on the outside of the bag. The 
stewards will have 12 boxes open and ready for handlers to place their bag inside an open box. Handlers will 
remove their scented glove and place it inside the box alongside, and with, the numbered bag, so it is clearly 
visible. If there are not 12 handlers, the stewards and/or judges will scent the remaining gloves and put them in 
boxes. The handlers will then leave the area. Once the boxes containing the personal gloves are set in the 
ring, exhibitors who miss their section will forfeit their run unless there are additional sections 
scheduled. 

 

The steward will randomly mark the boxes 1 through 12. The steward, nor anyone else, may not touch either the 
scented glove or the plastic bag. The steward or judge will mark which box belongs to which handler on the 
handler’s score sheet for the judge and then place the closed boxes in in a row, in the search area, and on the 
floor or ground. Boxes must be uniform in size and be at least 24 inches apart from one another. Due to random 
marking and placement of boxes, the boxes are not to be moved or replaced within each group so as not to 
confuse which box belongs to which handler. Once the group of boxes are set, the only reason for a steward or 
judge to move a box is to re-set it in line if needed. 

 

Handlers will be called to the search area in order, and upon entering the search area will go to the designated 
area of the start line. They can be facing the row of boxes. The judge will then order the handler to “Search” and 
the handler may reach down and allow the dog to sniff their hand prior to searching. Handlers will be responsible 
for calling the alert. If correctly identified, a pass will be awarded. If a handler calls an incorrect alert, searching 
will end. Handlers in Handler Discrimination may re-cue their dog during the search by allowing the dog to sniff 
their hand, and only their hand, once the search has begun. Handlers may not carry additional scented items 
with them for the dog to be re-cued. 

 

Section 9. Scoring, Faults and Time for the Novice, Advance and Excellent levels. Each leg is based on a 
pass or fail basis. A pass is considered correctly calling alerts when the dog finds the hide and the handler makes 
correct calls where applicable in each search area and no more than one (1) fault. Maximum times for each 
search must not be exceeded and are determined by the specific competition. Times for the searches should 
not exceed three (3) minutes for Novice, Advanced or Excellent. Each search requires that the handler state 
“alert.” The dog must locate the correct hide and the handler must call the alert within the allotted time to receive 
a passing search. Placements are ranked by time. 


Non-Qualifying. 

o If the search goes over the maximum time allowed for the search. 
o If the handler stops the search. 
o If more than one fault has been assessed. 
o If the handler calls an incorrect alert. 
o If the handler intentionally kicks a box out of the line of containers. 






Faults. Only one fault is allowed per search. Descriptions of faults for infractions and incorrect calls are 
outlined elsewhere in the rulebook. 

o A fault will be assessed for each handling error. 
o Giving the dog any additional command and/or gesture after the “Alert” call if asked “Where?” 
o Aggressive alerts will be assessed a fault for each incident. 




 

Section 10. Master level: (MHD) class may be held either inside or outside. A larger ring/search area is 
preferred, however no search area smaller than the minimum size (40 x 60 or 2,400 sq. ft) may be used for this 
class. 

 

Pre-judging. This class will be judged in sections that will have up to twelve (12) handlers per section. 

• All handlers will bring one personal item such as keys, a shoe, a sock, a shirt and so forth to the 
prep area no sooner than 15 minutes prior to the beginning of their section. The personal item 
cannot be a glove, must be free of food and must fit inside a cardboard box that is 12 x 9 x 3. The 
personal item must fit inside the box without any parts of the item showing. Once the boxes 
containing the personal items are set in the ring, exhibitors who miss their section will forfeit 
their run unless there are additional sections scheduled. 
• The boxes will be pre-numbered with the exhibitor’s armband number inside the box using 
printed labels or regular pens, and numbered one (1) through twelve (12) outside the box prior to 
the handler placing their items in the box. Running order will be determined by armband number 
(low to high or high to low) The bottom of the box will be taped, and the top flaps will be either 
removed or folded in so that they cannot be shut. If there are not 12 handlers, items scented by the 
judge and/or steward may be used to make up the 12 items. In this case, these items may be gloves 
such as those used in the lower handler discrimination classes. 
• During the briefing, judges are not to show handlers where their boxes are, nor are handlers allowed 
to specifically look for their boxes or ask the judge where their box is located before the search. 
• If it is necessary to adjust any of the handler’s personal items, the steward must use tongs or some 
other type of instrument in order not to transfer their scent onto the item. The steward will then bring 
the boxes to the ring and place them in the search area as directed by the judge. The judge will 
decide where the boxes will be placed in within the search area. 




 

Search area set-up. Prior to the search, the search area must be set and marked as follows. 

• Using the long side of the search area, there must be a designated portion which is to be marked off 
with tape, chalk or marking paint (depending upon if the search area is inside or outside), that runs 
the entire length of the search area and is at least 5 feet from the ring/area barrier This is considered 
the blank (unoccupied) area. 
• Another area that measures 10 feet by 10 feet must be marked off that includes the 5-foot section 
of the blank area, which will be located approximately in the center of the long side of the ring. 
• Within this area there will be a section that measures 6 feet by 4 feet. This is the handler’s station 
and starting area where the working handler will be positioned. 
• The remaining handlers in that section may not watch the searches within their section until after 
they have run. No dog other than the working dog may be in the actual search area. (See image; 
not to scale). Boxes do not need to be placed where the "X's" are indicated in this image. 




 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 X X 

RANDOMLY PLACED BOXES 

X X 

 

 X X 

 

 X X 

 

 X X 

 

 

 X X 

 

P1012TB3#y1 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 10 X 10 section 

P1022TB5#y1 


 

6 X 4 

Handler 
Station 

P1024TB6#y1 


60’ x 5’ Blank area 

No Scented boxes allowed 

P1025TB4#y1 


 

 

 

 

Judging procedure. The blank area directly behind the handler’s station (60 feet long by 5 feet wide) and the 
designated square (10 feet by 10 feet) that surrounds the handler’s station as well as the handler’s station (6 
feet by 4 feet), will not contain any search items. 

• All 12 boxes containing the individual handler’s items for that section must be randomly 
placed at least 10 feet in all directions from the 10’ x 10’ section and the 60’ x 5’ blank area. 
Placement of the individual boxes must be arranged in a scattered pattern and must be at least six 
feet away from any other item including the edges of any side of the ring. All boxes must be placed 
prior to the handler entering the ring, and after the judge's briefing. It is the responsibility for each 
handler to be ready when it is their turn to run. 
• The working handler and dog will enter the ring and go immediately to the designated handler’s 
station and must stand facing forward for the duration of the search. Handlers must not look for their 
box prior to entering the ring or while preparing their dog to search. The handler must not move 
around in or step outside of this designated marked area at any time until the dog has returned to 
the handler and the exercise is finished. 


o The handler will remove the leash and send the dog within approximately 30 seconds from entering 
the handler's section. The handler will send the dog using a verbal command only. Any form of 
hand signal, or forward movement of the handler's body or arm will be penalized up to and including 
a non-qualifying score. 
o The handler is allowed to reach down and allow the dog to sniff their hand prior to sending the dog 
to search. 
o In this class, the handler cannot direct the dog to the item once the dog is searching or use 
additional commands and/or praise while the dog is working. 
• Once the dog is sent, the handler must remain standing quietly and cannot move about within the 
designated area. 



o The handler must not use any body language to direct the dog such as staring at or leaning 
toward the correct box. 
o The handler must not direct the dog to the item, or speak to the dog, once the dog is searching 
o The handler must not use additional commands and/or praise while the dog is searching. 
o If the dog is having trouble, the handler may recall the dog to the handler’s station one time 
without penalty. If the handler recalls the dog the second time, a fault will be assessed. The 
handler may not recall and resend the dog more than two times. Time will not stop when the 
handler recalls the dog. 
• The dog must indicate it has found the handler’s item by either doing a sit or down at the item before 
the handler may call an alert. The handler must not command and/or signal the dog to sit, down, or 






stay during any part of this exercise. Timing will stop when the handler calls “Alert.” After the handler 
calls the alert, the judge shall count down, “three,” “two,” “one,” “release.” The dog must 
remain at the indicated box for a minimum of three (3) seconds. Should the dog change position 
from a sit to a down or a down to a sit, the judge shall assess a fault and will restart the count with 
the dog in the new position. If the dog changes position a second time, the team will receive a non-
qualifying score. The handler must not command and/or signal the dog to sit, down, or stay during 
any part of this exercise. Upon completing the count but not before the judge says “Release,” the 
handler will recall the dog to the handler’s station. The handler may reward the dog upon its 
return at the handler’s station. When food rewards are used, any food or crumbs that fall to the 
floor/ground will be assessed a fault for each occurrence. 
• If any boxes are moved by the dog during the search, the steward and/or judge will re-position the 
box(s) so that the box is in the original place. 





 

Scoring, Faults and Time for Master Level. Time allowed for the search is four (4) minutes. Timing stops when the 
handler calls alert. The dog shall then remain at the correct box in a sit or down position for at least three (3) consecutive 
seconds. The judge's count shall start once the handler calls alert and the dog is in the correct position. If the dog breaks 
position, the count will stop and start over again when the dog is back in one of the correct positions. If the dog does not 
take a correct position within ten (10) seconds, it will be scored as a non-qualifying performance. The dog is allowed 1 
change of position before receiving a non-qualifying score. Placements are based upon the fastest search time and are 
awarded first to dogs with no faults followed by any dog with one fault. Each leg is based on a pass or fail. A pass is 
considered correctly calling the alert when the dog finds the handler’s item, the dog exhibiting either a sit or a down and 
staying with the handler’s item in the sit or down position for three (3) seconds, promptly returning to the handler when 
called and having no more than one assessed fault. 

 

Non-Qualifying. 

o If more than one fault has been assessed. 
o Handler purposely directs the dog to the correct box. 
o If the handler steps outside of the designated area for any reason during the search. 
o Handler does not remain facing forward during any part of the search. 
o Handler restarts the dog more than twice. 
o Handler recalls a dog to start over while the dog is actively working. 
o If the dog does not sit or down at the “correct” handler’s box. 
o If the dog does not remain in a sit or down position position for a minimum of 3 seconds after the 
handler calls alert, they will receive a non-qualifying score. (1 change of position allowed). 
o If the handler commands and/or signals the dog to sit or down, or stay at the correct handler’s box. 
o If the dog sits or downs at the incorrect box and the handler calls the alert. 
o If the dog sits, downs, or stands at the incorrect box and does not resume searching on its own and 
finds the correct item before time runs out. 
o If the dog picks up the correct item and returns to the handler with the item. 
o If the dog picks up an incorrect item and returns to the handler with that item. 
o If the dog paws at, puts a paw on, mouths, or picks up any item or box that is not their handler's 
item. 






Faults. Only one fault is allowed per search. 

o If the item belongs to their handler and they paw, mouth, or pick up the item, it will be a fault. 
o If the dog changes position during the 3-second stabilization period, they will be assessed a fault 
for each position change. 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 12 

NOSEWORK EVENT RULES AND STEWARDING 
RESPONSIBILITIES 

 

Section 1. Dog Temperament and Behavior. Owners of UKC registered dogs are responsible for the behavior 
of their dogs at UKC events. Dogs participating in UKC events are expected to have stable temperaments 
appropriate to their breeds and to be sufficiently well trained so that no dog’s behavior interferes with the judge’s 
ability to evaluate the dog or its performance. 

 

Owners or designated handlers are always expected to ensure that their dogs present no threat to persons or 
other dogs attending the event. A judge must excuse a dog when the dog’s behavior significantly interferes with 
the judge’s ability to evaluate the dog or to evaluate the dogs of other exhibitors. The judge must mark the dog 
“Excused” in the judge’s book and state the reason for the excusal. 

 

A judge must excuse a dog when the dog’s demeanor gives the judge reason to believe that the dog may not be 
safely examined or appears to be a serious threat to other dogs in the ring. The judge must mark the dog 
“Excused” in the judge’s book and state the reason for the excusal. 

 

Reactive dogs. Specific-colored bandanas and/or collars used to indicate a dog is reactive to other dogs, people 
or its surroundings is strictly prohibited. Dogs showing such behavior are to be excused and, may be asked to 
leave the trial grounds by the Event Committee. The judge must mark the dog “Excused” in the judge’s book and 
state the reason for the excusal. The judge’s decision on such matters is final. 

 

Section 2. Judge and Steward Position Responsibilities. Trials should be set up so that the integrity of the 
search and its immediate area are not compromised. Besides the Event Committee, several other workers are 
necessary to run a successful event. Ideally, the following positions should only be assigned to a judge or a 
worker who is well versed in the specific task. 

• Nosework Judge. Each judge will officiate and place their own hides when assigned to all classes of a 
nosework trial. All calls will be determined by the judge and will be final. 
• Gate Steward. The duty of the Gate Steward is to work closely with the Table Steward and to maintain 
the running order of the exhibitors. They ensure that the next dog in sequence is on-deck and ready when 
it is their turn to enter the search area and to advise the Table Steward of any changes in sequential 
order. 
• Table Steward. The Table Steward’s duties include but are not limited to; preparing score sheets for the 
judge, verify score sheets for accuracy, record scores and running time in any electronic program used 
for the event, calculate placements for the judge to verify and to help arrange awards. 
• Timing Steward(s). A Timing Steward is assigned the task of timing each performance. Prior to each 
search, the Timing Steward must make sure their stopwatch is set back at zero and ready. For the Novice 
and Advance levels, only one timing steward is necessary. Clubs that offer Superior, Master and Elite 
levels must arrange to have two timing stewards. During any search, the Primary or Secondary Timer 
may give a warning when 30 second of search time is remaining in all levels. Timers will make every 
effort to give the warnings, but situations may arise when a warning is not given. 
o Search Timer. The Search Timer will be utilized during all Nosework classes from Novice 
through Elite and for all Handler Discrimination classes. Their responsibility is to keep track 
of the time of the actual search. For Superior, Master and Elite classes, the Search timer 
will stop and re-start the timing during the class. The stopwatch will be initially started 
when any part of the dog or handler team crosses the starting line and will stop when the 
handler calls any “Alert.” If the handler is correct, for classes with more than one hide, 
timing will re-start as soon as the handler gives a command and/or signal to begin 
searching of the team makes any commitment to begin searching. The search times from 
each hide will be recorded as the dog’s actual time in the following ways: 
1. For one hide: The time on the stopwatch from the start of the search until the 
handler calls “Alert.” 






2. For more than one hide: The judge can record each section of the search times, 
have the search timer clear the stopwatch and restart again, and then add all 
search times together for a total search time, 




OR 

3. (Preferred) The Search timer stopwatch is not cleared between searches, the timer 
is simply stopped and restarted, until the last “Alert” or “Finish” is called. 




 The Search time is what is recorded in the judge’s book as the actual time the dog has taken to find the 
hides and used to determine placements. 

 

o Element Timer. The Element Timer will be utilized in the Superior, Master and Elite levels 
and is responsible to time the overall element time. The timing of the search will begin 
when any part of the dog or handler team crosses the start line and will end when the 
handler calls the final “Alert” or “Finish.” The Element timer does not need to provide the 
element time to the judge for any Superior, Master, of Elite classes unless the judge 
requires it, or the team has gone over the allowed element time. After the judge records 
the search time on the score sheet, the timer will immediately set their stopwatch back to 
zero in readiness to start timing again for the next team. The Element timer is the one who 
gives the 30 second and/or 10 second warnings since they are tracking the allowable time 
the team has to complete the search. 


 

No dog and handler team may exceed the maximum element or search time as posted at the trial. 

 

• Equipment Steward. Judges have the authority to set their own equipment at their discretion. The 
Equipment Steward is assigned to care for all the nosework articles, equipment, distractors and other 
such items that are used by the club for Interior and/or Exterior searches (minus vehicles). The Equipment 
Steward is responsible to see that all boxes used for Handler Discrimination and Container searches are 
available and if required, are correctly numbered, meet the specifications for each class, and have the 
correct number of containers available for all the classes being offered at the trial. The Equipment 
Steward is to set aside the odor boxes that are required to be under the care of the Box Steward. 


 

• Box Steward. Judges have the authority to set their own equipment and care for boxes at their discretion. 
The responsibility of the Box Steward is to care for the odor boxes. No one except the Box Steward 
should handle any of the odor boxes, nor should the Box Steward handle any of the blank or distractor 
boxes. The Box Steward also assures the boxes used at the start of any trial using a container/box, is 
free of any other residual target odors boxes. Between each search, the Box Steward is responsible to 
wipe the odor box down using a clean towel or paper towel, and to set the box back in line. In the Handler 
Discrimination classes, if it is necessary to adjust any of the handler’s personal items, the steward must 
use tongs or some other type of instrument in order not to transfer their scent onto the item. 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 13 

PLACEMENTS, AWARDS, AND RIBBONS 

 

Section 1. Placements, Awards, and Ribbons. 

 

Class Placements: For Element and Class Trials: The judge shall give up to four placements, for passing 
searches in each section of each class, based on the running time and if a fault was incurred. First place must 
be awarded to the dog with the fastest time and no faults; second place to the dog with the next fastest time and 
no faults; and so forth. Placements will continue by determining the fastest times without any faults. Teams that 
qualify for a placement that have incurred a fault will always be placed after teams with no faults with the fastest 
time and one fault followed by the second fastest time with one fault, and so forth. If two or more dogs have one 
fault, the winner shall be the dog with the fastest running time (least amount of elapsed time). If the dogs remain 
tied, the tie shall stand. 

For Class Trials: Exhibitors are not required to be entered in all four elements to be eligible to enter a class trial 
but must be entered in all four elements to be eligible for placements in the class trial. 

 

Cash prizes. UKC clubs may offer cash prizes at performance events without prior written authorization from 
UKC. Cash prizes include but are not limited to cash awards, gift cards, and gift certificates. 

 

Awards and trophies. Clubs may offer such awards and trophies as they choose; however, awards and trophies 
given by a club must be given consistently to all winners at the same level. Clubs may accept trophies donated 
by individuals or other organizations and these trophies may be designated for specific breeds or specific 
accomplishments. All awards and prizes must be made available prior to the event and must be offered to be 
won outright. 

 

Ribbons and Rosettes. All ribbons and rosettes must include the UKC logo. Judges will award up to four placements 
for each class and division. Placement ribbons and colors are mandatory. Passing search ribbons are optional. 
Ribbons awarded for all other wins must be any other colors or combination of colors. 

 

Section A and Section B ribbons will be awarded separately as follows: 

 

Nosework Trial Ribbon Colors: 

1st place – blue 

2nd place – red 

3rd place – green 

4th place – yellow 

Passing search – light blue 

Total Dog Qualifier – Red, Black & White 

Total Junior Qualifier – Teal, Black & White 

 

Section 2. Total Dog and Total Junior Awards: A club offering conformation and at least one eligible performance 
event may apply to offer the Total Dog Award when submitting the Event Application as a non-licensed event. Clubs 
offering Total Dog must offer Total Junior. Participants for Total Dog and Total Junior must meet eligibility 
requirements. 

 

Section 3. Combined Club Events: A club (or with written approval by UKC, clubs holding events in conjunction 
with each other) offering conformation and at least one eligible performance event may apply to offer the Total Dog 
Award when submitting the Event Application. Clubs hosting more than one conformation and performance event on 
the day Total Dog awards are offered may consider all events eligible for Total Dog qualifiers. 

• Eligible dogs. Dogs that are permanently registered with UKC as of the day of the show and dogs that have 
a valid Temporary Listing (TL) number as of the day of the show are eligible to compete for the Total Dog 
Award. 


 

 


Section 4. Requirements for Total Dog and Total Junior Award: Refer to the Official UKC Rules for All-Breed 
Events for specific qualification to earn a Total Dog and Total Junior award. 

• Total Dog. Dogs must be entered in conformation (regular or altered) and a qualifying performance event on 
the same day. A dog must win an award over another dog in conformation and qualify in the performance 
event in order to earn the award. 
• Total Junior. A Junior Handler must be entered in Junior Showmanship and a qualifying performance event 
on the same day. The Junior must earn a class placement or award of merit, over another junior handler, in 
Junior Showmanship and qualify in the performance event in order to earn the award. 
o For juniors participating in Drag Racing Events. The junior must have someone of age to catch the 
dog in the catch area, but all other requirements for drag racing must be completed by the junior 
handler to have the run count as a qualifying performance toward Total Junior. 





 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 14 

HALL OF FAME AWARDS 

 

The United Kennel Club would like to recognize dogs that have accomplished higher level titles in Nosework. 
Each dog that meets the qualifications to be a Hall of Fame member will be posted on the UKC website for the 
current year. 

 

Section 1. Eligibility: All UKC permanently registered dogs, and all dogs with Performance Listing (PL), 
including mixed-bred dogs, are eligible to participate in the Nosework Hall of Fame. Dogs competing on a 
Temporary Listing number must become permanently registered to be included in the Hall of Fame and must be 
permanently registered by January 31st of the following year to be invited to the Hall of Fame Invitational. 

 

Section 2. Hall of Fame Competition Year. The qualifying competition year is January 1st to December 31st of 
each year. All Hall of Fame qualifiers will be invited to compete in the Hall of Fame Invitational held at the Premier 
Nationals the following summer. 

 

Section 3. Qualifying for the Hall of Fame: The Hall of Fame is an annual publication. To make the Hall of 
Fame for the current year, a dog must earn one of the following titles: 

 

• Elite Nosework (EN) 
• Nosework Champion (NWCH) 
• Nosework Grand Champion (NWGC) 
• Handler Discrimination Champion (HDCH) 
• Handler Discrimination Grand Champion (HDGC) 


 

Dogs that have earned the Nosework Grand Champion title will be lifetime members of the Nosework Hall of 
Fame. 

 

Section 4. Hall of Fame Certificates: Special Hall of Fame certificates will be sent annually to that year’s Hall 
of Fame qualifiers. These certificates are in addition to regular title certificates, which will be sent when that title 
is earned and recorded. In addition to a certificate for making the Hall of Fame, the following annual awards will 
be offered: 

1. Top Ten. The Top Ten dogs by Group (Guardian Dogs, Scenthound, Sighthound, Gun Dogs, Northern, 
Herding Dogs, Terriers, Companion Dogs, Mixed Breeds) that have earned the most Nosework titles 
within the calendar year will be sent a certificate for this achievement. 
a. To find out what Group a breed is in, please visit that breed standard at www.ukcdogs.com. 



2. The youngest dog to earn the Elite Nosework title within the calendar year will be sent a certificate for 
this achievement. 
3. The oldest dog to earn the Elite Nosework title within the calendar year will be sent a certificate for this 
achievement. 
4. Achievements by dogs with a disability. A certificate will be sent to the highest-achieving dog with a 
disability for the calendar year. Handlers may nominate dogs for this award and do not need to own a 
dog to nominate them. 


 

Section 5. Nosework Hall of Fame Invitational: Dogs completing the Elite Nosework (EN), Nosework 
Champion (NWCH), and the Nosework Grand Champion (NWGC) titles will be invited to participate in the 
Nosework Hall of Fame competition. Dogs earning these titles will be published on the UKC website and updated 
weekly. As lifetime members of the Hall of Fame, dogs who have earned their Nosework Grand Champion 
(NWGC) title will be invited back for all following years to participate in this competition. 

 

The title of Nosework Hall of Fame (NWHOF) will be added to the winning dogs name each year. 

 


Dogs will compete at the Elite level in all four elements: Container, Exterior, Interior, and Vehicle. The winning 
dog will receive a special award and have their picture featured on the Hall of Fame website the following year. 
The title of Nosework Hall of Fame (NWHOF) will also be added to the dog’s name. the competition winner will 
be determined as follows: 

• The dog that qualifies in all four elements with the fastest time, will be determined the winner. 
• If no dogs qualify in all four elements the dog that qualifies in three of the elements with the fastest time 
will be determined the winner. 
• If there are no dogs that qualify in at least three elements, a winner will not be determined for that year. 
• Dogs issued a fault must not place over any dogs without faults regardless of their time. 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER 15 

DEFINITIONS 

 

Actual Search Time. The actual accumulated time on the stopwatch from the time when any part of the 
dog/handler team crosses the start line, the handler gives a search command, or begins to search, to each call 
of alert For Novice and Advanced Nosework classes and all Handler Discrimination classes, this would also be 
the same as the Element time. For Superior, through Elite (or all classes with more than one hide), this is the 
amount of time the dog is actively searching allowing for the stop and restart of timing. This is the time that is 
recorded in the judge’s sheet. 

 

Accessible Hides. A hide in a location where the dog can reach the source of odor with its nose. 

 

Air Scenting. Technique used by a dog to locate a target odor. The dog searches on wind/air currents and works 
the scent cone to identify the source. 

 

Alert. A pre-determined response offered by the dog when the dog has searched for, and, located target odors. 
When a dog has correctly indicated the source of odor and the handler will call an “alert” which can without 
question be easily identified as such. 

 

Aggressive Alert. Any alert behavior or action that can compromise the integrity of the hides or causes damage 
to the area of the hide or on the object. Examples of aggressive alerts includes, but is not limited to: scratching, 
pawing, pushing objects, digging, biting at the hide or object, excessive licking of the hide or object. 

Area of Interest. A noticeable, readable, physical change in behavior in a dog during a search when the dog 
reacts to an odor. A pattern of behavior following the dog’s initial reaction to a trained odor. The dog displays 
enthusiasm and desire to remain and trace the trained odor to its source. 

 

Blank Area. A room or area that does not contain any target odor for Nosework trials. Blank areas will normally 
occur only in Interior element searches. 

 

Blind. A dog is blind if it has no useful sight. 

 

Dog In White (DIW). A qualified, non-competing dog and handler team at every trial that shall perform all the 
exercises in the same manner they will occur during the competition. DIW is not required for Handler 
Discrimination classes. This is to allow the Judge to verify the integrity of the hides. 

 

Judge. Suitably authorized individuals with relevant training and experience who administer and assess the 
performance of the canine team. Judges are responsible for ensuring that the event is run according to UKC 
rules and regulations. Judges will place or oversee the placing of all hides in the trial, hold the Judges briefing, 
handlers briefing, and monitor all elements of the trial. Judges will have the final say at a Nosework trial. 

 

Chain of Behaviors. Two or more behaviors that occur in a fixed order. 

 

Change of Behavior. A characteristic pattern of behaviors interpreted by the handler that occurs when the dog 
detects a trained odor. The pattern of behavior may be unique to each dog. 

 

Contaminating Odor. Any odor not ordinarily part of a target odor signature. 

 

Day-of-show entry. Most clubs allow entries to be taken on the day of a show or trial. Shows that do not offer 
day of show entries are designated as “PE (pre-entry) ONLY” in any “Upcoming Event” listings. 

 

Disqualified. Dog is determined ineligible for competition. 

 


Elements. Designated areas where dogs will be searching for target odors. These elements consist of, 
Container, Exterior, Interior, and Vehicle searches. 

 

Element Time. The time set by the judge for each search. No element time shall exceed the maximum time 
specified in each section for each element. The Element time is the accumulated time on the stopwatch from the 
time when any part of the dog/handler team crosses the starting line, or begins to search, to the time when the 
handler makes the final call of “alert” or “finish.” This time is not stopped and restarted but continues to run for 
the entire time the dog is searching or until the designated allowed time is accumulated. 

 

Entry Form. An official document required for entry into all licensed events. The entry form provides all the 
necessary information regarding the dog being entered in the event as well as the owner information for the dog. 

 

Excused. A dog that has been excused by a judge in any event may not participate in any other events of 
the same type in the same show or trial, except that in an applicable performance event, an excused dog 
may compete in another class at the same trial. A dog excused in Trial 1 may be shown again on the same 
day in Trial 2, and it is also eligible for any performance events on the same day. 

 

False Alert. Handler in a Nosework trial calls an “Alert” when there is no odor, but the dog has indicated, or 
when the room has odor, but the dog indicates in the wrong area. 

 

Final Response (Indication). A behavior that the dog has been trained to exhibit in the presence of a target 
odor. In Nosework trials, this response must be passive (sit, stare, down, point, etc.). 

 

Fringe Response. The dog has a training deficiency and responds on lower thresholds of odor and is not able 
to work odor truly to source. 

 

Hides. The hidden odor the dog is searching for, contained inside a scent receptacle, and placed on or inside 
objects in a designated search area. All objects and vehicles used for placing hides for an Interior, Exterior, or 
Vehicle search may only be used once in a class and during a trial weekend to protect the integrity of the hides 
for all classes. 

 

Immediate Family. spouse, parent, stepparent, child, stepchild, sibling, grandchild, in-law is considered 
immediate family members. 

 

Inaccessible Hides. A hide that is not close enough for a dog to reach the source of odor to pinpoint the exact 
location of the hide. 

 

Incorrect Response. In a controlled environment, the dog responds as if a trained odor was present when it is 
known that it is not. The dog can respond in an incorrect area due to a handler cue, time and distance issues, 
and novel stimulus. 

 

Leg. A passing search toward a Nosework title. 

 

Miss/Non-indication. When the dog fails to alert or exhibit the trained behavior in the known presence of the 
target odor on which the dog was trained. 

 

Nested Search Area. Search areas built upon as classes advance. An area can begin as a Novice 
Interior/Exterior Search area and be continually enlarged up to the requirements for an Elite area. Once any hide 
location is used, it must be completely removed from the search area before moving on to the next class. For 
instance: Novice Interior area contains 12 hides. The hide is located inside the pocket of a folding chair. The 
chair containing the hide must be totally removed from the area prior to using the area again or enlarging the 
area for an Advanced Interior search. 

 


Non-Qualifying Search. Also referred to as an “NQ,” “Non-Passing,” or “Zero score.” A non-qualifying search 
results from an unsuccessful performance, as specified in these Regulations, or from an unacceptable behavior 
or unaccepted number of faults designated in Nosework. 

 

Nosework Trial. An all-breed event hosted by a licensed club at which judges evaluate the ability of handler and 
dog teams to perform a series of searches in accordance with the governing rules. 

 

Passive Response. A type of response that the dog displays or indicates in a manner that doesn’t disturb the 
environment after the dog has detected a trained odor. Responses may include but are not limited to sit, stand, 
or lie down quietly, stare, etc. 

 

Pre-entry and Pre-entry only. Some clubs offer pre-entry in addition to day-of-trial entry. Pre-entries must be 
submitted by a specific date and are normally lower in price than day-of-trial entries. Trials that do not accept 
day-of-trial entries are designated as “Pre-Entry Only” 

 

Residual Odor. Odor that remains from training aids or actual objects of focus once the aids or objects have 
been removed. 

 

Scent Cone. The path of dispersion that the odor follows in the given wind or air currents, and in a given 
environment. 

 

Sportsmanship. Conduct that demonstrates proper consideration for fairness, ethics, respect and a sense of 
fellowship with one’s competitors; while exhibiting, responsibility, self-control and respect for both authority and 
opponents. 

 

Staging area. Also known as on-deck areas is an area provided by the club for all dogs who have not completed 
their search. For Handler Discrimination and element classes only one staging area will be required. A steward 
is required for monitoring the staging area and making sure the dog and handler team on deck is prepared when 
called. 

 

Start line. A line that is easily identifiable by the handler. All teams must start behind the start line. Timing will 
start as soon as any part of the handler or dog cross any part of the start line. 

 

Target Odor. Essential oils that are used in Nosework as target scents for dogs to search. The required odors 
for each level are indicated for each class. 

 

Timed Out. In Nosework if the handler and dog team run over the set element time during their search. 

 

Wait List. A sequential list of all entries that are received after the numerical limit of allowable entries per judge 
has been met, is called a “wait list.” 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


INHERENT RIGHTS AND POWERS OF UKC 

*Revised December 18, 2009 

 United Kennel Club holds and has reserved to itself certain inherent rights and powers in connection with 
conducting its business, registering litters, transferring registrations of dogs, licensing events, and awarding 
titles. These inherent rights and powers include but are not limited to the following: 

United Kennel Club has the right to inspect all reports, scorecards and documents related to UKC events. Some, 
but not all, of the items subject to inspection are: 

a. Scores; 
b. Disqualifications of dogs for fighting or other reasons; 
c. Errors by the recording person; and 
d. Documentation excluded for any reason. 


 UKC reserves the right to correct any mistakes found during such inspection whether or not the document 
has the signature of a Judge or Club Officer. UKC reserves the right to itself and in its sole judgment and 
discretion, to take such actions and impose such sanctions as would: 

a. Bar an individual from entering or participating in any way in any UKC licensed event. 
b. Bar an individual from transferring or registering any pups or dogs in that person’s name (joint or full 
registration) or to any member of that person’s family. 
c. Bar an individual from receiving Championship points for any dog registered in that person’s name (joint 
or full registration). 


 By way of illustration, the following constitute some, but not all, of the situations calling for the above sanctions: 

a. Falsification or alteration of a UKC Registration Certificate, Pedigree, UKC Easy Entry™ Card or any 
other UKC document. 
b. Falsification or alteration of any reports of wins issued to UKC 
c. Falsification or alteration of receipts issued by UKC Judges. 
d. Switching, wrongfully using or attempting to use a UKC Registration Certificate, Pedigree, UKC Easy 
Entry™ Card or any other UKC document. 
e. Selling or attempting to sell a dog with false or incorrect UKC Registration Certificate or Pedigree. 
f. Intimidating, threatening, or injuring a Judge, Club/Association member, event participant or spectator, 
or UKC representative. 






 The six illustrations given above are only by way of example and UKC reserves to itself its inherent right and 
power to impose such sanctions in any other circumstances deemed appropriate by UKC. 

 Any individual who is found guilty by a court of law of a crime involving dogs will be barred from United Kennel Club 
for an indefinite period. A person shall be considered guilty in a criminal proceeding if they are convicted by a judge, 
jury, or if they enter a plea bargain or other arrangement to plea to a lesser offense, or if their case is disposed of by 
any form of deferred adjudication; a person shall be considered guilty in a civil proceeding if they are held responsible 
or liable by a judge, jury, or if a compromised settlement is reached between the parties. 

 

UKC POLICY REGARDING PERSONS ASSOCIATED WITH 
FIGHTING DOGS 

 

Any individual or group of individuals known by UKC to promote, support, raise dogs for fighting; knowingly sell, 
give or trade dogs that will be used in fighting; condone or be associated with the facing off, game testing, rolling 
or pitting of dogs; or arrested for attending and/or participating in a dog fight, will have the following actions taken 
against them by United Kennel Club: 

1. All dog registration privileges will be revoked for life. 

a. The person(s) will not be permitted to register any litters of puppies. 

b. The person(s) will not be permitted to transfer ownership of any puppies or adult dogs into their name. 

2. The person(s) will be barred for life from participating in or entering any UKC licensed events. Their 
dogs will not be awarded any UKC Championship points or titles even if handled by another person. 

3. The person(s) will be barred for life from advertising in any UKC publications. 

 

Anyone aware of any persons currently involved in such activities as are listed above should report them to 
United Kennel Club. 


OCTOBER 15, 2021 RULE CHANGES INSERT 

 

“Certifying Official” has been changed to “Judge” for all references in Nosework. This makes the terminology 
consistent throughout all programs. 

 

Chapter 1, Section 18: Placements, Awards, and Ribbons was moved to page 44 and given its own chapter 
(Chapter 13). The section is now Section 1. 

 

Chapter 1, Section 18: Ribbons and Rosettes, has been moved to page 44. Changed to reflect the following: 
Judges will award up to four placements for each class and division. Placement ribbons are mandatory. 
Passing search ribbons are optional. Prior to this change, passing search ribbons were mandatory. 

 

Chapter 2, Section 4: Distractions. A toy distraction will be required in the Advanced level. This also clarifies 
that judges are allowed to bring their own distractions although the club is still responsible for providing them if 
the judge does not. 

 

Chapter 2, Section 4: Distractions. Clarification was added concerning discussing distractions with exhibitors 
prior to the end of the trial. An exposed distraction was added to the Master level and a human distraction was 
added to the Elite level as possible distraction criteria. 

 

Chapter 2, Section 4: Hides. Clarification was added for the re-use of hide areas. 

 

Chapter 3, Section 3: Was added to clarify the running of trials and use of search areas. 

 

Chapter 4, Section 5: Clarification of using a DIW if an unentered dog is not available. 

 

Chapter 6, Section 3: Addition of allowing a Novice dog to receive a fault for the first incorrect call of an alert 
and continue searching within the allowable time. If an incorrect call is made by the handler, time will not stop. 
The handler will be informed of the error by the judge and will be allowed to continue to search within the 
allowable time for the class. 

 

Chapter 6, Section 5: Non-Qualifying changed to: If the handler calls an incorrect alert the second time. 

 

Chapter 6, Section 5: Faults changed to: First incorrect call of an alert. 

 

Chapter 7, New Section Added: Section 4 details the addition of a distraction required at the Advanced level. 
The distraction can only be a toy that must be hidden. This is added due to the total absence of distractions 
until the Superior level. Handlers do not have the skills and practice in any lower level to begin to read their 
dog properly when it encounters a distraction until the Superior Level. Adding a single distraction in the 
Advanced level allows handlers to experience a lower-level distraction and begin to read their dogs behavior 
differences when encountering odor versus a distraction. 

 

Chapter 8, Section 2: Clarification of odor and hide placements. 

 

Chapter 9, Section 4: An additional distraction is allowed in the Master class. Along with food or toys, an 
object that mimics an animal or person may now be used in this level. This would be something like a stuffed 
toy or statue. Toy and food distractions must remain hidden, however mimic distractions may be exposed. 

 

Chapter 10, Section 4: An additional distraction is allowed in the Elite class. Along with food, toys, or mimic 
distractions, a human may now be used as a distraction. 

 

Chapter 10, Section 5: Clarification of odor and hide placements. 

 

 


Chapter 11, Section 8: Time restraints are added to when HD items can be brought to the ring and what 
happens if a handler does not make it to the ring within the allowable time. 

 

Chapter 11, Section 10: Time restraints are added to when HD items can be brought to the ring and what 
happens if a handler does not make it to the ring within the allowable time. Clarification on how boxes are 
numbered for the Master class has also been added. Boxes will no longer be numbered on the outside with the 
handler’s armband number to avoid exhibitors looking for their boxes. Exhibitors’ armband numbers will not be 
required to be inside the box. This may be done by using printed labels or writing the armband number inside 
the box prior to the handler arriving with their article. The use of a permanent marker will not be allowed due to 
the odor. 

 

Chapter 11, Section 10: Judging procedures. Clarification was added as to where boxes can be placed within 
the HD Master search area. 

 

Chapter 11, Section 10: Clarification was added as to when the handler is allowed to recall the dog in the HD 
Master search. 

 

Chapter 13, Section 1: Section 18 of Chapter 1 was moved to this chapter and section. Placement, Awards, 
and Ribbons and the Total Dog information was updated within this chapter. Passing Search ribbons are now 
optional. 

 

Chapter 14: New chapter was added detailing the Hall of Fame Awards 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


